C2B2
Co-Creating Better Blue

A proposal for Mistra’s call “A sustainable blue economy for Sweden”
Programme host: University of Gothenburg
Programme director & contact person: Torsten Linders
[+46 766 18 28 73, torsten.linders@gu.se]
University of Gothenburg
Department of Marine Sciences
Box 461, 405 30 Gothenburg

Contents
Summary in English .......................................................................................................................................................... 2
Summary in Swedish ........................................................................................................................................................ 2
1. Vision, aims and expected impacts ............................................................................................................................... 3
2. Scientific value, including state-of-the-art .................................................................................................................... 4
3. Benefits to society ....................................................................................................................................................... 17
4. Management and organisation .................................................................................................................................... 20
5. Skills and networks ..................................................................................................................................................... 21
6. Description of work packages, including deliverables................................................................................................ 24
7. Communication ........................................................................................................................................................... 33
8. Budget ......................................................................................................................................................................... 36
References ....................................................................................................................................................................... 38
Appendix I – Impact logic
Appendix III – CVs
Appendix III – Certificate from planned programme host

Abbreviations of C2B2 partners:
Chalmers – Chalmers University of Technology
CIT – Chalmers Industriteknik Group
IHE - IHE Delft Institute for Water Education
IVL – IVL Swedish Environmental Research Institute
RISE – RISE Research Institute of Sweden
SEI – Stockholm Environment Institute
SIME – Swedish Institute for the Marine Environment
SMHI – Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute
SND – Swedish National Data Service
SU – Stockholm University
UGOT – University of Gothenburg
UMF – Umeå Marine Sciences Centre
WMU – World Maritime University
Abbreviations of other organisations:
HELCOM – Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission (the Helsinki Commission)
OSPAR – OSPAR Commission (Oslo and Paris Conventions)
SEPA – Swedish Environmental Protection Agency
SGU – Geological Survey of Sweden
SMA – Swedish Maritime Administration
STA – Swedish Transport Agency
SwAM – Swedish Agency for Marine and Water Management

Summary in English
As countries increasingly turn their attention to the sea for diversifying their economies and ensuring the critical
provision of services, there is an urgent need to radically change the way we think and use the ocean, away from a blue
growth-based approach and towards a sustainable blue economy. This is particularly urgent in Sweden where our
relationship with and dependency on the ocean have changed dramatically during living memory. It requires no less
than a transformation in the way we think about the marine space and the activities increasingly deployed in our
seas, and an assessment for how multiple goals can be realized more effectively and sustainably. Such an assessment
requires in turn bringing different actors and agendas together in a constructive dialogue. As a larger part of society has
an ever-increasing stake in the ocean, it is imperative that we develop new forms of stakeholder collaboration combined
with science-based ecosystem governance practices. C2B2 envisions a more sustainable, open and democratic, multisector and multi-actor blue economy and sustainable society. C2B2 aims to bring about transformative change through
participatory governance supported by relevant and insightful data and knowledge by re-imagining the role of quintuple
helix actors across the blue economy in Sweden in processes ‘from data to knowledge to decisions and action’. The
programme has been specifically designed to deliver a ‘co-created better blue’ which - by its very design - consists of
highly developed collaboration with the users of the research results, namely the diverse set of stakeholders involved in
multi-level participatory governance of the ocean. Three distinct pathways will ensure successful achievement of the
C2B2 outcomes and impacts: data, people and systems. Central to the C2B2 approach is the LivingLabs co-creation
methodology, applied to the development of three demonstration cases to trigger transformative changes towards
participatory ocean governance, involving relevant sectors and actors in Sweden’s three marine basins. C2B2
brings together 13 partners from academia and research organisations, 25 co-funding associated partners from industry
and public sector, as well as stakeholders from civil society, and will actively recruit more actors to join during the
programme period. The overall C2B2 approach provides a major advance beyond the current State of Art by i) going
beyond a single-sector approach; ii) implementing the quintuple helix concept at a practical level by using data to ‘give
nature a voice’; iii) extending the LivingLabs co-creation methodology to the complex setting of the sustainable blue
economy; iv) practicing responsible Action Research by initiating and developing these co-creation processes and
embedding them as routines for participatory governance, to ensure the adoption of collaborative and adaptive
management practices beyond the C2B2 programme lifetime; and v) establishing a continuously evolving knowledge
system for science-based ecosystem governance. The extensive demonstration and validation of this approach in C2B2
means this can also be replicated elsewhere in Sweden and internationally.

Summary in Swedish
När länder i allt högre grad riktar sin uppmärksamhet mot havet för att diversifiera sina ekonomier och säkerställa
kritiskt tillhandahållande av tjänster, då finns det ett akut behov av att radikalt förändra vårt sätt att tänka och använda
havet, bort från en blå tillväxtbaserad strategi och mot en hållbar blå ekonomi. Detta är särskilt akut i Sverige där vårt
förhållande till och beroende av havet har förändrats dramatiskt under bara ett par generationer. Det kräver inget mindre
än en omvandling av vårt sätt att tänka runt den marina domänen och de aktiviteter som i allt högre grad används i
våra hav, och en bedömning av hur fler mål kan förverkligas mer effektivt och hållbart. En sådan bedömning kräver i
sin tur att olika aktörer och agendor möts i en konstruktiv dialog. Eftersom en större del av samhället har ständigt ökande
intressen i havet, är det absolut nödvändigt att vi utvecklar nya former av samarbete mellan intressenter kombinerat med
vetenskapsbaserade ekosystembasered förvaltning. C2B2’s vision är en mer hållbar, öppen och demokratisk, blå
ekonomi med fler sektorer och fler aktörer och ett hållbart samhälle. C2B2 syftar till att åstadkomma transformativ
förändring genom deltagande styrning, stödd av relevanta och insiktsfulla data och kunskap, genom att ge en ny roll till
den femdubbla helixen av aktörer i Sveriges blå ekonomin, i processer "från data till kunskap till beslut och handling".
Programmet har utformats specifikt för att leverera ett "samskapat bättre blått" som - genom sin design - består av ett
högt utvecklat samarbete med användarna av forskningsresultaten, nämligen de många olika intressenter som är
involverade på flera nivåer i deltagande styrning av havet. Tre distinkta vägar kommer att säkerställa att C2B2
framgångsrikt uppnår resultat och effekter: data, människor och system. Centralt i C2B2sangreppsätt är LivingLabs
samskapande metodik, tillämpad i utvecklingen av tre demonstrerade fall för att initiera transformativa
förändringar mot deltagande havsförvaltning, som involverar relevanta sektorer och aktörer i Sveriges tre
havsbassänger. C2B2 samlar 13 partners från akademi och forskningsorganisationer, 25 samfinansierande associerade
partners från industri och offentlig sektor, samt intressenter från civilsamhället, och kommer aktivt att rekrytera fler
aktörer under programperioden. C2B2s övergripande angreppsätt innebär ett betydande framsteg i förhållande till
nuvarande ’State of Art’ genom att i) gå längre än en strategier för enskilda sektorer; ii) implementera femdubbla
helixkonceptet på en praktisk nivå genom att använda data för att "ge naturen en röst"; iii) utvidga LivingLabs
samskapande metodik till den komplexa miljön för den hållbara blå ekonomin; iv) utöva ansvarsfull aktionsforskning
genom att initiera och utveckla dessa samskapande processer och bädda in dem som rutiner för deltagande styrning, för
att säkerställa införandet av samarbetande och adaptiv förvaltningspraxis efter C2B2-programmets livslängd; och v)
etablera ett ständigt utvecklande kunskapssystem för vetenskapsbaserad ekosystemstyrning. Den omfattande
demonstrationen och valideringen av detta tillvägagångssätt i C2B2 innebär att detta även kan replikeras på andra håll i
Sverige och internationellt.
2

1. Vision, aims and expected impacts
Point of departure
The ocean – the new frontier of human activity – is being redefined by new discoveries, technologies, national strategies,
and ecological imperatives. Yet it is undeniable that the status of most seas is in decay - and if the goal would be to
restore or improve their status, then most human activities should be banned. Instead, we witness that in recent years
the blue economy is promoted as an answer to energy and food insecurity as well as to an increased demand for shipping
of goods, and transport of people and services. So humanity depends on marine livelihoods, but the blue economy is
also rapidly increasing pressure on the long-term sustainability of marine ecosystems.
As countries increasingly turn their attention to the sea for diversifying their economies and ensuring the critical
provision of services, there is an urgent need to radically change the way we think and use the ocean, away from a blue
growth-based approach and towards a sustainable blue economy.
Marine industries are changing at high speed, while technology is evolving fast. Ocean governance is, however, lagging
behind due to little physical presence in the ocean, sparse, patchy and expensive data collection, as well as conflicting
goals among stakeholders over the use of the marine space. Interests clash from opposing goals, on the one hand, to
protect our ocean and achieve the climate goals, and on the other hand, to expand the blue economy to tackle
socioeconomic challenges such as transport, food and energy security. Additionally, openness and inclusiveness in
ocean governance also lag dramatically behind due to low levels of ocean literacy, poor awareness of ocean-related
challenges, and data coverage several orders of magnitudes worse than on land and in the coastal zone.
Moving away from blue growth and towards a sustainable blue economy requires a transformation in the way we think
about the marine space and the activities increasingly deployed in our seas. This transformation demands an
assessment for how multiple goals can be realized more effectively and sustainably. Such an assessment requires in turn
bringing different actors and agendas together in a constructive dialogue. As a larger part of society has an everincreasing stake in the ocean, it is imperative that we develop new forms of stakeholder collaboration combined with
science-based ecosystem governance practices.
This is particularly urgent in Sweden where our relationship with and dependency on the ocean have changed
dramatically during living memory, from being one of Europe’s major shipbuilding and fishing countries, to using the
ocean mainly as a route for export/import, and the coast for leisure. Now we need to re-engage with our extensive and
very diverse offshore areas in new ways, via marine renewable energy production, by implementing knowledge-based
marine spatial planning, and by sustainably managing the ecosystem services of our ocean. Sweden needs a sound yet
flexible approach to deal with the biogeographical, and social-economic diversity related to the governance of a
sustainable blue economy from the northern most part of Gulf of Bothnia all the way to Skagerrak.
Vision
The programme C2B2 - Co-creating Better Blue envisages a world in which we address our ocean challenges via
holistic, collaborative, and adaptive management practices for science-based ocean governance and a sustainable
blue economy: a more sustainable, open and democratic, multi-sector and multi-actor blue economy and sustainable
society.
Aims
The overall aim of C2B2 is to trigger transformative change in ocean governance in Sweden away from a singleuse/single-actor paradigm, and towards multifunctional use through co-creation founded on data for ecosystem
resilience. This is essentially about creating the conditions for a robust, inclusive and just transition towards participatory
ocean governance. To achieve this, C2B2 will purse three interrelated aims:
1) To provide the basis for a continuously evolving knowledge system for science-based ecosystem governance
in Sweden by advancing and interlinking three pillars: ecosystems and climate science; open, data-driven
innovation & emerging technology; and governance theory and practice.
2) To demonstrate in practice in LivingLabs how the transition towards science-based ecosystem governance of
a sustainable blue economy can be achieved by initiating, developing and embedding co-creation processes as
routines for participatory governance, ensuring adaptive management practices beyond the C2B2 programme
lifetime.
3) To reshape our relationship with the ocean by instilling new ways of working together and practicing sciencebased ecosystem governance, so that more actors and individuals can realise that they (could) have a direct stake
in the offshore space.

3

Expected impacts
The overall expected impacts of C2B2 address the Mistra aspiration of a sustainable blue economy for Sweden and
resilient marine ecosystems. The programme’s overall impact logic (see Annex 1) has been carefully designed to ensure
that the C2B2 activities and the programme results achieve the C2B2 aims. The substantial demonstration of triggering
transformative changes towards participatory ocean governance in the three main Swedish basins leads to tangible shortterm impact in terms of inclusive participation of diverse stakeholders in multi-level governance, contributing with
generated data, knowledge and actions to the observation and protection of the oceans.
In the medium term, the C2B2 programme is expected to contribute to establishing an enhanced scientific knowledge
base, increased stakeholder involvement and more effective ocean governance and management via enhanced
institutional frameworks and processes; to the use of open by design, multi-purpose (permanent) offshore infrastructure
by various sectors; and to participatory governance that evolves over time based on embedded co-creation and social
learning.
In the long term, C2B2 is expected to contribute to place-based social cohesion and relations to the sea; improved
knowledge and skills of archipelagos and coastal communities with stronger social and economic links within and to
the offshore; cultural ecosystem services provided by the sea/coastal landscape; as well as sustainable employment,
occupation and value chains.
Three distinct pathways will ensure successful achievement of these outcomes and impacts:
1. Pathway 1- DATA: change how data about the ocean is produced, perceived, and accepted, accessed,
combined, and used in science, policy and society.
2. Pathway 2 – PEOPLE: enhance who is engaged in ocean governance and how they participate and embed
these new participation practices.
3. Pathway 3 – SYSTEMS: strengthen the interactions of stakeholders locally and across multi-level governance;
strengthen existing approaches such as marine spatial planning to be more integrative and sector sensitive.

2. Scientific value, including state-of-the-art
2.1 Challenges
Our ocean holds the key to a more sustainable future. It is critically important for regulating climate and for providing
food, hosting an unknown richness of minerals and other non-renewable resources, biodiversity, biomass and genetic
resources, and not least space for energy production, transport, recreation and natural habitats.
However, our way of using and governing the use of the coastal and marine space, including emissions from air and
land, rising CO2 levels and a changing climate exert a huge, combined stress on marine ecosystems and their services
(Heinze et al. 2021). Moreover, many of the economic ocean sectors are in a rapid phase of “blue acceleration” (Jouffray
et al. 2020). According to the High-Level Ocean Panel, this acceleration could lead to seas supplying 40 times more
renewable energy, 6 times more food, 12 million new jobs, trillions in return on investment and 20% of the greenhouse
gas emission gap to limit warming to 1.5-2 degrees (Stuchtey et al. 2020).
A key concern with this blue acceleration is our history of overexploitation and unsustainable use of common resources
and the increasing pressures on key ecosystem services. Balancing the ambitious conservation targets of protecting 30%
of marine space by 2030 (IUCN 2021/UK 30by30 initiative) with a fast-expanding blue economy challenges our current
systems to govern our common ocean and their assets unveiling their limitations.
Challenges to achieve a Fossil Free Energy Transition
Forecasts for 2050 show that the global electricity demand will almost double (IEA, 2021). The EU's target is that by
2030, 32% of all electricity production will originate from renewables; and Sweden aims at 100%, renewable electricity
production by 2040 (Energimyndigheten, 2019). This will require better technology that allows for more effective and
cleaner sources of energy, less intrusive and more flexible structures that reduce impacts on ecosystems and societies,
but also better planning in the total energy mix considering regional differences in energy production and demand and
resilient/robust supply systems.
Offshore wind power can stand for 45 percent of electricity needs by 2050. A tenfold increase in offshore wind power
in Sweden is forecasted by 2030. By 2050, an extension to 167 TWh of offshore wind power is estimated to be the most
cost-effective way to meet the increased electricity demand (Svensk Vindenergi, 2021).
It is expected that an expansion of offshore wind power in Sweden will lead to falling electricity prices, particularly in
southern Sweden, where electricity prices today are highest. This could even out today's large price differences between
Sweden's electricity areas. Electricity production in southern Sweden, where the need for new electricity production is
high, is also expected to increase (Svensk Vindenergi 2021).

4

Challenges to achieve Food Security
The global food demand is projected to increase to 50-70% by 2050.
The Blue Economy
Research shows that the ocean could provide over six times more food
There are different understandings of what
than it does today - more than two thirds of the animal protein that
constitutes the “blue economy”. According to
will be needed to feed the future global population. With such an
the World Bank (2017) there is broad
recognition that a blue economy needs to entail
expected increase, the sustainable production of blue food will depend
the sustainable use of ocean resources for
on factors such as policy reforms, technological innovation and the
economic growth, improved livelihoods, and
extent of future shifts in demand (Costello et al. 2020).
jobs while restoring and preserving the health of
From a global perspective, an increase of regional marine food’s the ocean. For the IUCN (2022), efficiency and
primary production is crucial for food and nutrition security and for
optimization of natural marine resources within
resilience in periods of crisis, but also to create economic prosperity
ecological limits is paramount in the blue
and reduce transport needs. Today, the degree of self-sufficiency if economy. The ocean is seen as a space for
Swedish seafood is low and hence most seafood is imported
development where marine spatial planning,
especially at national level integrates the
(Hornborg et al, 2021).
interests and needs of conservation, sustainable
Recent studies have identified fisheries as one of the most impactful
use, extractive activities, marine transportation
human activities in Swedish offshore marine areas, resulting in that
and coastal tourism, and ensures that the
most commercially important fish stocks are in an increasingly
integrity and functioning of coastal and ocean
perilous state (Johansson, 2021).
systems is maintained. For the UN (2022), a blue
economy should be economically viable
Swedish coastal fisheries in the Baltic Sea have been deemed
(prosperous) and environmentally sustainable,
unsustainable in terms of the status of their main fish populations,
but also culturally appropriate and foster social
their economic profitability, and even as a source of secure
equity and human well-being. For the EU
employment (Jagers et al., 2012; Johansson, 2021). And in the North
(2021), a sustainable blue economy is a means
Sea, although fishing has declined since the reform of the EU
to achieving the objectives of the European
Common Fisheries Policy in 2002, its marine ecosystems are still in a
Green Deal and ensure a green and inclusive
perturbed state and there has been a shift from pelagic to benthic
recovery from the pandemic. While most
production (Johansson, 2021). There is also competition within the
definitions include an angle of sustainability, the
food production sector between aquaculture and fisheries as well as
extent to which the blue economy should cater
between large scale and small scale more sustainable coastal fisheries.
for various goals, such as economic recovery,
climate
neutrality,
circular
production,
While the increasing interest in aquaculture is so far mainly close to
preserving biodiversity, mobility, trade, etc.,
the shore or on land, technology is being developed for farming in
differs between the different conceptualizations.
more offshore areas as well. There is an intensive debate in Sweden
We use the term sustainable blue economy here
on the difficulties for new aquaculture facilities to obtain the required
to stress the need to strive for sustainable use of
permits for establishment and operation. Moreover, in the sight of
the ocean by various sectors.
spatial competition, multiuse could be an option, but it meets similar
difficulties in terms of permits, knowledge gaps and communication across sectors.
Challenges to achieve Clean and Effective Mobility and Transport
According to the World Bank's Global Mobility Report (2017), global freight volumes are projected to grow by 70
percent from 2015 to 2030. Passenger traffic is expected to increase by 50 percent, which is estimated to correspond to
an additional 1.2 billion vehicles on the earth's road network – which is already congested. Shipping will handle a
significant portion of the growing volumes. According to the OECD1, trade volumes are expected to triple globally by
2050.
On a national level, regardless of the above increase, Sweden is completely dependent on functioning import and export
routes. As much as 90 percent of our imports and exports are done by sea at some point (NRIA Sjöfart 2021). Shipping
is also an important part of marine tourism in Sweden, as indicated in the OECD’s Sustainable Ocean Economy Report
(OECD 2022). Pre-pandemic (in 2018), international sea passenger transport receipts grew from 45 million in 2008 to
205 million USD.
The European Green Deal calls for a 90% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from all modes of transport, and this
includes maritime transport – including fishing operations, freight, passenger traffic, defence operations, and all related
infrastructure such as electric charging stations and circular sources of fuel – which currently account for 2-3% of the
annual global CO2 emissions.
Besides emissions, shipping also causes a range of direct environmental pressures on the marine environment. For
example, over one third of the copper load in the Baltic Sea is estimated to originate from shipping (Ytreberg et al.
2021). Copper and other toxic substances released from ships will lead to marine ecosystem deterioration, thereby
indirectly contributing to reducing the ocean’s capacity as a carbon sink (Roth and Gustafsson 2021). Importantly,
projections of the Baltic Sea through to 2050 indicate that shipping will become the major source of strong acid addition
to surface waters, particularly if there is widespread use of wet scrubber systems (Turner et al. 2018).
1 https://www.oecd.org/ocean/topics/ocean-shipping/

5

Challenges to achieve Good Environmental Status
The environmental status of the seas surrounding Sweden has still not reached the targets set out in national and
international regulatory frameworks (primarily the EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive and the EU Water
Framework Directives). An ecosystem-based approach has been proposed as an approach to address negative
environmental trends and complex interactions (Grimvall et al. 2019).
While there has been some progress in many of the contributing basins in the region, there is a need to improve the
clarity of the regulations to match environmental conditions and ensure compliance, which requires monitoring of
ecological data and dynamic transfer of scientific knowledge (Bohman 2018). Furthermore, the governance system in
marine areas is highly dispersed due to the decentralized multi-actor system with unclear decision-making mechanisms
(Morf et al. 2021). As a result, the legal implications of an ecosystem-based management are unclear (Nilsson and
Bohman 2015). Beyond national legislation, there are serious bottlenecks when it comes to ensuring vertical policy
coherence (i.e., from international to national and local) which has resulted in a patchwork of European policies, national
policies, private initiatives and regulations on different levels that often conflict with each other (Boyes and Elliott 2014;
Langlet 2018).
Cross-cutting challenges
Integrated approaches such as Marine Spatial Planning have been suggested play a key role to support that clean energy
production at the very least does not interfere with the interests of other marine activities, and at best is placed to
positively contribute to ecosystems and existing industries such as fishing and tourism. Here, thorough analysis of
present systems and governance innovation are needed to oversee the regulatory system and ensure that planning and
sector management are environmentally sustainable and not merely energy efficient.
While in principle, ecosystem-based management is being adopted by many management organisations, operationalising
integrative and ecosystem-based management is challenging (e.g. Cedergren et al. 2020 for fisheries co-management,
Morf et al. 2019 for MSP, Prutzer et al. 2021 for water co-governance; Sandström et al. 2014). A mismatch in
institutional arrangements, created by the traditional sectoral focus of marine environmental and resource management
and existing administrative boundaries are key factors obstructing implementation (Alexander & Haward, 2019). Coping
with complex marine issues requires an inclusive approach with a wide array of values, perspectives and knowledges,
to ensure common understanding, acceptable distribution of costs and gains, and legitimacy (e.g. Jentoft & Chuenpagdee
2009).
In response to this context, C2B2 goes beyond a single-sector approach and instead C2B2 focuses on addressing what
we deem as the real challenge of the coming decade: governing multiple demands in increasingly claimed and fragile
marine ecosystems. This demands science-based, integrative and adaptive governance that considers the challenges
arising from specific societal or sector goals while guiding how goals from multiple agendas can be realized, including
capitalizing from synergies between goals and mitigating potential trade-offs (Stephensen et al. 2019).

2.2 Overall C2B2 concept
The breath and magnitude of the above challenges as
well as of the opportunities brought about by an
expanding blue economy requires a science-based
ecosystem governance of a sustainable blue economy
situated within the larger context of transition
governance, i.e. the “proactive steering of societal
transformations towards sustainability” (Halbe and
Pahl-Wostl, 2019). This view embraces the full
complexity of multi-actor processes in these
transformations and requires not only the governance
of the process of change, but also finding ways to
change current forms of (ocean) governance to ensure
sustainability. C2B2 focuses on bringing about
transformative
change
through
participatory
governance supported by relevant and insightful data
and knowledge. C2B2 reimagines the role of
quintuple helix actors [academia, industry,
government, civil society, and the natural
environment] across the blue economy in processes
‘from data to knowledge to decisions and action’, Figure 1 C2B2 concept
increasing
opportunities
for
participation,
deliberation and influence, building open infrastructure and strengthening capacity to support the inclusion of data and
knowledge in multilevel governance. Importantly, in this conceptualisation, data is a means to ‘give nature a voice’.
6

Advancing three inter-related pillars of science-based ocean governance
C2B2 will provide the basis for a continuously evolving knowledge system for science-based ecosystem governance
through the interconnection of three thematic pillars: 1) open ecosystem and climate change science; 2) open, datadriven innovation & emerging technology, and 3) ocean governance and adaptive management. Insights developed in
one pillar will feed into the co-creation process while advancing the other two pillars, e.g., innovative sensor data
collection advances ecosystem science and adaptive management practice. Fully set within Open Science (UNESCO,
2021) and Open Innovation paradigms (Chesbrough, 2003), the co-creation process will open up the scientific and
innovation processes to diverse societal stakeholders, incl. competitors, while providing Open Data as well as Open
Access to results throughout. The C2B2 research programme will initiate and develop these co-creation processes and
embed them as routines for participatory governance, to ensure the adoption of collaborative and adaptive
management practices beyond the C2B2 programme lifetime.
Pillar 1. Open ecosystem and climate science: Despite recent advances in ecosystem science and climate science, gaps
still exist relating to how human activities on land and at sea affect offshore ecosystems’ resilience, loss of biodiversity,
and climate change-induced ocean acidification and warming. This pillar conceives relevant scientific knowledge
stemming from different disciplines (e.g. natural as well as social sciences) and including non-traditional and local
knowledge. In order to advance scientific knowledge of ecosystems, biodiversity loss and climate change impact in
Swedish offshore areas, this pillar will identify key data and knowledge gaps. Integrating new data sources (in
collaboration with pillar 2) to advance our scientific understanding, this pillar provides integrated and adaptive change
assessments, forecasts, and simulations of the ecosystems, and consolidate the best available knowledge and data of the
ecosystems, the climate, land-sea interactions and the effect on biodiversity from blue economic and human activities,
understandable by different audiences.
Pillar 2. Open, data-driven innovation & emerging technology: To enable data-driven innovation by commercial
and non-commercial actors, both data and a data acquisition infrastructure are needed. This programme will enable data
collection on marine ecosystem parameters, atmospheric parameters incl. air pollution and GHG-emissions, as well as
economic and human activities, and other relevant indicators. One means to achieve this is by re-imagining blue
economy sectors as data collection platforms. Existing blue economy sectors (e.g., shipping, fisheries, offshore
installations) can serve as key contributors to data collection about offshore ecosystems above and below the surface on
numerous parameters, especially when combined with emerging technologies such as AI, machine learning, and
autonomous drones above and below the water. For example, collaborative mechanisms for data collection already exist
on a relatively small scale for fisheries and shipping. Swedish shipping company Stena Line is world leading in using
ships as sensor platforms together with operational agencies, such as SMHI, in the Ferrybox programme. Other
mechanisms include ‘fishing for data’7 initiated by Berring Data Collective, now being implemented on the Swedish
West coast. Further offshore installations (e.g., wind farms and subsea cables) can be made open-by-design. New data
collection platforms will work in tandem and complement dedicated monitoring platforms, such as research vessels,
scientific marine drones and buoys. The new platforms will contribute to unique datasets, which until now have proven
very costly and complex to obtain. Of paramount importance is the integration of any new data acquisition into existing
databases and aggregation efforts. Further, an open innovation approach (as prescribed in ISO 56002 and 56003) will
be promoted, in which users, competitors and other stakeholders may collaborate from early stages of the innovation
process. Marine data stewardship will provide subject-specific support to ensure the availability of marine data in line
with the FAIR data principles (Findable, Available, Interoperable, Reusable), open data management and integration
into existing aggregators.
Pillar 3. Ocean governance & adaptive management: As the expansion of the blue economy is inevitable, exclusivity
of marine uses or conservation thus will not suffice as the governance approach to existing and new human activities in
the marine domain. Still, human activities and their impact have to remain within the carrying capacity of the ecosystems
that maintain our livelihoods, hence the need to shift from blue growth to a sustainable blue economy, from exclusive
use and single purpose to multi use, and from end-of-pipe to circular. Good governance in general entails the principles
of legitimacy, transparency, accountability, human rights, rule of law, and inclusiveness (OECD, 2015). Ocean
ecosystem governance has an added dimension of complexity as diverse (sectoral) human activities in a given (offshore)
ecosystem must be coordinated and managed towards a common outcome, i.e., a resilient and sustainable ecosystem.
Moreover, adaptive management requires close interaction among 1) monitoring activities and hence the advances in
the technology pillar; 2) research and knowledge production activities, including those in the open science pillar; and 3)
the application of new insights and knowledge in current management practices. This pillar therefore closely
collaborates with the other two and draws on existing theory, practice and emerging insights related to participatory
governance and adaptive management. It will also advance these and formulate recommendations based on social
science research in the LivingLabs.

7

2.3 C2B2 Methodology
Co-creating participatory ocean governance and a sustainable blue economy as social innovation. To fulfil the
aims of the programme to trigger transformative change and create the conditions for a robust, inclusive and just
transition towards participatory ocean governance, we will apply a social innovation lens. We understand social
innovation as the multi-stakeholder processes needed to carefully combine both technological and non-technological
innovations (Wehn et al., 2021). C2B2 will extend the social innovation framework and action research methods
developed in the Ground Truth 2.0 and AfriAlliance projects by one C2B2 partner to the ocean governance realm,
employing a quintuple helix social innovation co-creation approach involving academia, industry, government, civil
society, and the natural environment. Fundamentally, our co-created science-based ocean governance will include key
stakeholders from the outset and extend current multi-stakeholder participation in marine environmental management2
with the sound integration of science, technology and innovation.

Figure 2 C2B2 methodology

Already to develop the present proposal, a broad range of stakeholders has been involved in the discussions. C2B2 is
based on an inherently transdisciplinary and interdisciplinary approach (see Figure 2), leveraging and, where relevant,
combining relevant concepts, methods and approaches spanning marine, ecosystem and climate science, engineering,
and social sciences and humanities in an integrated bottom up and top down approach.
As part of the C2B2 bottom up approach, C2B2 will employ a LivingLabs co-creation methodology and develop three
demonstration cases involving relevant sectors and actors in Sweden’s three marine basins. LivingLabs is a wellestablished methodology for dealing with complex socio-technical-ecological systems. It is based on social science
theories, i.e., innovation experiments with stakeholders in real-life settings, that a) create value for users by
understanding their needs and motivations, b) give future users influence on the decisions, c) aim for sustainability in
economic, ecological and social terms, d) involve multiple perspectives and collaborate widely for openness, and e)
conduct activities in a real-life context (Ståhlbröst and Holst, 2012). Our LivingLabs methodology has been previously
tested and validated in six countries in Europe and Africa, addressing different challenges in diverse geographic, socioeconomic, cultural and political settings (Wehn et al., 2019; Wehn and Pfeiffer, 2020). Iterations and validation points
during the co-creation create spaces for social learning among participants and ensure that co-created plans are realistic,
accepted, and legal, and avoided designs dominated by one stakeholder group, or based on assumptions of one group
about the motivations of another.

2 E.g. Co-management North Bohuslän: continuous management of Sweden’s first marine national park in the Koster Sea

8

These activities will be interlinked with
• scientific efforts to identify key data and scientific knowledge gaps in ecosystem and climate science and to
advance scientific knowledge about ecosystems, biodiversity loss and climate change impact in Swedish
offshore areas. We will explore the land-sea interaction in the offshore blue economy and use existing and novel
data sources, as well as numerical models to quantify the effect on biodiversity from permanent offshore
installations, and especially (bottom-fixed) wind farms. Numerical tools for assessments and simulations of the
ecosystems and climate of the case study areas will feed relevant scientific knowledge into the discussions in
the LivingLabs;
• technological advances: to address identified gaps, an open innovation process (incl. via a strategically
disseminated Open Call for Solutions) will serve to generate innovative, open by design approaches to data
collection and knowledge co-creation that will be tested in the LivingLabs and demonstrated and exploited
during open innovation events. We will provide benchmarks for open by design, multifunctional system
solutions to help re-imagine blue economy sectors (that have traditionally operated to deliver specific services)
as platforms for hosting multiple activities based on their offshore presence. Marine data stewardship will serve
to coordinate, integrate and soundly manage marine data generated by the C2B2 programme and beyond.
For the C2B2 top down approach, our starting point are the existing multi-level governance structures, approaches and
resources (principles, agreements, directives; legislation, strategies and policies, financial resources, MSP, integrated
and sector management). Using scenarios of transition, comparative policy-based tools and international collaboration,
we will explore where radical changes and where incremental adjustments to the status quo can lead to beneficial
outcomes for society and biodiversity.
The activities, changes and results generated in each LivingLab will be accompanied by research activities using an
Action Research approach (plan, act, observe, reflect) to trigger changes in the real-life setting, and then to research
and study these to create new empirical knowledge. In particular, knowledge will be advanced via deliberate (peer)
learning at three levels: 1) within LivingLab cases and thematic pillars, 2) across LivingLab cases and thematic pillars,
and 3) internationally through international organizations and their working groups and platforms, such as the
International Council for Exploration of the Seas (ICES), the Oslo and Paris Convention (OSPAR Commission), the
Helsinki Committee (HELCOM), Vision and Strategies around the Baltic (VASAB ) and other relevant international
expert groups (e.g. IMO, IOC-UNESCO, IPCC), as well as on-going EU and global project collaborations.
Monitoring, Evaluation & Learning of the project activities in the three LivingLabs and assessment of the project
impacts at large: The evaluation of the C2B2 demonstration activities will serve two purposes. On the one hand, it will
enable learning in the ongoing or subsequent activities: the continuous evaluation of the demonstration activities in the
LivingLabs is needed for adaptive management, on a practical level, of subsequent programme activities. On the other
hand, changes in the socio-political dimensions of the LivingLabs need to be assessed, including unintended or
unexpected ones, to determine the effectiveness of the C2B2 approach in different conditions, which will provide the
basis for adjusting guidance and tools. The guiding principles for the evaluation activities will be a) to balance the data
and information needs of the project and cases with resources requirements and demands of available methods and b)
to practice co-evaluation, wherever feasible, with stakeholders engaged in the LivingLabs and across vertical multilevel governance. The assessment of evolving impacts in the LivingLabs will build on existing frameworks and methods
(e.g. IHE, SEI) to help the LLs self-report (with optional support) and communicate emerging impacts as stories or
impact briefs. Both, the evaluation for informing the demonstration activities and for assessing the effectiveness of the
C2B2 approach, will build on the elaborate methods and templates produced by previous projects. This will help capture
data and insights generated during the project implementation in structured and efficient ways. These activities will
capture initial baselines and changes in governance and management resulting from co-creating the ‘better blue’ in each
LivingLab: i.e., the state of Swedish marine spatial planning and relevant sector management beyond the coastal zone,
the role of new governance instruments related to ‘open by design infrastructure’, changes in the roles of official
monitoring actors with monitoring tasks, and social learning mechanisms to instil participatory governance and adaptive
management of offshore ecosystems in a multi-stakeholder, inclusive and just setting in the long run.
We will ensure the sustainability of the project results and increase local ownership over the process and results via
a two-tear approach: the first tier consists of training C2B2 partners in the multi-stakeholder creation processes and
developed tools; the second tear will train (local) stakeholders and partners who can help embed the process into
formalized decision-making and ensuring sustainability of the implemented technologies, data and knowledge flows
and participatory procedures.

9

The C2B2 programme is divided into three distinct stages:
Stage 1 (M1-6): Inception. Assessment of state-of-the-art in each thematic pillar, including case-specific socioecological and governance baselines. Guidance for and training of LivingLab facilitators. Establish research
coordination across pillars. Initiation of the C2B2 Partner group and the Stakeholder reference board. Initiation and
recruitment to the C2B2 research training group, with one PhD student per thematic pillar. Case-specific and overall
initial stakeholder analysis and mobilisation of key stakeholders for each LivingLab. Initiation of internal and
external communication channels.
Stage 2 (M7-36): Implementation. Initiation of LivingLabs and joint agreement on problem definition, including
data requirements for scientific and management purposes. Iterative activities in LivingLabs to develop interoperable
solutions for offshore data collection based on identified data needs. Interoperable combination of new and existing
data. Scientific knowledge generation and exploration. Data and knowledge integration in scientific theories and
models and current management practices. Continuous social science research on governance dynamics and related
challenges, gaps and enablers in all three LivingLabs. Continuous communication and dissemination of results to the
large group of C2B2 partners, associated partners and to all relevant stakeholders.
Stage 3 (M37-48): Consolidation. Support and capacity building for new forms of participatory governance and
sustainable blue economy in Sweden in terms of data provision, knowledge generation, skills, management practices
and recommendations. Joint generation of (new) business models for distinct programme results.
Demonstration of co-creating participatory ocean governance in Sweden
In order to demonstrate in practice how the transition towards sciencebased ocean governance of a sustainable blue economy can be achieved,
the C2B2 programme will set up LivingLabs in three demonstration cases
involving relevant sectors and actors in Sweden’s three main marine basins.
The location of the selected case study areas (North, East, West) are
shown in Figure 3 and their characteristics are presented in Tables 1-4.
The selected case study areas coincide with SwAM’s management areas. It
is crucial for C2B2 to address all three basins given the overall aim of C2B2
to trigger transformative change in ocean governance towards a sustainable
blue economy in Sweden. Moreover, the Swedish context
(environmentally, socially and economically) differs considerably in the
regional marine basins. The LivingLabs in these cases will serve to initiate,
develop and embed co-creation processes as routines for participatory
governance, ensuring adaptive management practices beyond the C2B2
programme lifetime.
Figure 3 C2B2 case study areas

Table 1 – Characteristics of the three C2B2 case study areas

Ecosystem characteristics

Characteristics
Salinity
Ecological status
according to MSFD
Depth
Sensitivity to CC
Biodiversity
Natural values
Connectivity with other
ocean basins
Blue infrastructure
Winter ice cover
Mammals prevalence
& diversity
Birds prevalence &
diversity
Broad habitat type(s)
according to MSFD

North

East

West

Very low
Good

Low
Poor

High
Good

Shallow
Very high
Low
Low
Very low

Deep
Medium
Medium
Medium
Low

Deep
Medium
High
High
High

Very low
Extensive
Low

Medium
Very limited
Medium

High
Very limited
High

Medium

High

High

Circalittoral zone dominates
but also areas with
infralittoral, and offshore
circalittoral mixed sediment,

Offshore circalittoral most
important but also areas with
infralittoral, and circalittoral
mixed sediment, mud, sand,

Infralittoral zone important,
but also areas with
circalittoral, and offshore
circalittoral mixed sediment,
mud, sand, coarse sediment,
10

North

East

West

mud, sand, coarse sediment,
rock and biogenic reef

coarse sediment, rock and
biogenic reef

Size
Maximum distance
from shore
Fishing

38 000 km2
100 km

75 000 km2
120 km

rock and biogenic reef.
Upper bathyal sediment or
rock and biogenic reef.
10 000 km2
60 km

Mostly small scale and
coastal

Coastal and large scale
pelagic

Coastal and large scale
pelagic

Offshore installations

A few interconnectors for
electricity and
communication

Many interconnectors for
electricity and
communication

Transport, industrial
ports

Medium use of seaways,
several important industrial
ports
Cultural heritage

One small wind farm; many
interconnectors for
electricity and
communication; Nord
Stream 1 & 2
Very intense use of
seaways, several important
industrial ports
Defence, tourism, energy
market

Existing data / tools
(ecosyst. social, economic)

Ocean governance & marine spatial
planning

Blue industry sectors

Geog
r.
scope

Characteristics

Other

Intense use of seaways; Port
of Gothenburg, largest port
in Sweden
Defence, tourism

Future trends

Test site;
Wind power and national
power grid

Escalating defence concerns;
wind power and national
power grid

Wind power and national
power grid

Experience with
co-creation

EBMM Pilot Stockholm
Archipelago (SwAM)

International
collaboration

Extensive with Finland

Established science-policy
hub (Gotland Blue Center);
EBMM Pilot Southern
Bothnian Sea (SwAM)
Extensive but complex
multinational

Range of stakeholders
engaged in decision
making

National MSP: some;
Regional/local planning:
many; consultation & sector
management

National MSP: some;
Cross-sectoral collaboration:
low-medium

Fisheries co-mgt
8-Fjords project; Comanagement
North Bohuslän
Extensive with Norway &
Denmark, other North Sea
countries.
National MSP: some;
Regional/local planning:
high; consultation & sector
management

Capacity/resources of
local authorities
MPAs
(HELCOM/OSPAR)
Data completeness
Data quality
Data access
Data collection via
citizen science

Low-Medium

Low-Medium

Urban high, rural low

~2 %
(+35% proposed)
Medium
High
Medium
Low

~5 %
(+5% proposed)
Medium
High
Medium
Medium

~20 %
(+10% proposed)
Medium
High
Medium
High

Tools

Symphony (SwAM);
operational forecasting
model (SMHI)

Symphony (SwAM);
operational forecasting
model (SMHI)

Symphony (SwAM);
operational forecasting
model (SMHI); KASK 3D
model; Koster Sea Model
(UGOT)

The LivingLabs in each case study will cover selected case study area(s) based on interests and priorities (see Tables 24). The stakeholders related to each LivingLab include selected C2B2 partners, associated partners and other actors.
During the programme implementation, a full stakeholder analysis will identify all relevant stakeholders for each
LivingLab.
Please note that the objectives of each LivingLabs present draft versions based on initial interactions with stakeholders
during the proposal phase. Therefore, some objectives are more advanced than others. All objectives will be co-created
and agreed by the LivingLabs stakeholders during the project implementation.

11

Table 2 - Case study NORTH
Characteristics
Ecosystem: The ecosystems in the Gulf of Bothnia are characterized by significant freshwater input, low
connectivity with the open ocean and cold winters. This generates an environment with low salinity, lower
biodiversity and a seasonal ice cover. The large river runoff also delivers significant nutrient and organic matter
loads (from both natural and human sources). Further, as ongoing climatic changes are more pronounced in the
Arctic and sub-Arctic (up to 3 times faster than lower latitudes), this area is a sentinel of the impacts of climate
change. In the Southern part of the case study area, there are notable increases in phosphorous concentrations,
increasing biomass of filamentous cyanobacteria and declining oxygen concentrations in bottom waters. The land
uplift in Sweden is at its highest in this case study area with a maximum of 10mm/year in the northern Quark.
Economy and users: The north of Sweden is experiencing a strong economic growth, combined with ambitions of
creating world leading sustainable industrial production and utilization of natural resources. The global drive
towards electrification, and a high demand for metals and energy security have all made the region attractive. The
Gulf of Bothnia has small and medium sized fishery, and many planned sites for offshore wind farms. The seaways
are crucial for many globally exporting industries located in the north of Sweden. The port of Luleå is home to the
Swedish fleet of icebreakers.
Society and governance: The north of Sweden is sparsely populated, covering 60 % of the land area but only home
to 12 % of the population, of which most live along the coast. Sweden’s only neighboring country around Gulf of
Bothnia is Finland, with many shared characteristics, challenges, opportunities, and indeed collaborations.
Governance innovation areas: Höga Kusten, Kvarken and Haparanda archipelago in terms of integrative coastal
planning and cross-border collaboration. There are no areas beyond jurisdiction of EU member states in the Baltic
Sea (except areas under Russian jurisdiction), which means that all water is covered by the EU Marine Strategic
Framework Directive (MSFD) and the Water Framework Directive (WFD). HELCOM, however, includes Russian
waters and cooperates with the EU.
Issues
The region is experiencing especially pronounced climate change. There is a substantial legacy of environmental
impact from process industries, for example fiber banks caused by the pulp industry, which can cause both pollution
and very substantial emissions of methane. Overall, the Gulf of Bothnia is characterized by less competition for
space and less international complexity, compared to other Swedish offshore areas, but the fast industrialization of
energy-intensive industries is likely to have an impact on marine ecosystems.
Stakeholders
C2B2 LivingLab lead: UMF
Public sector: County Administrative Board in Gävleborg; Municipality of Härnösand, HELCOM, SwAM, SEPA,
SMA, Svenska kraftnät, Geological Survey of Sweden
Private sector: Sweden Pelagic Federation, Hitachi Energy, LifeFinder Systems International AB, Ecobarge Sweden
AB, Clinton Marine Survey AB, Terntank, Sveavind Offshore AB, Cetasol AB, Sensative AB,
Combine AB
Civil society: Stiftelsen för Östersjölaxen, Kustfiskarna, Sportfiskarna, Upplands Fågelskådare, BirdLife Sverige,
Coastal water councils, WWF, The Swedish Society for Nature Conservation (SSNC)
Academia:
UMF, IHE, SIME, UGOT, CIT
Objectives of the LivingLab North
Scientific Improved understanding, based on additional/new data sources, of how human offshore
ecosystem &
presence and economic activity may be a driver for sustainability and climate change
climate
mitigation.
Technological
An offshore test area where industry (shipping, fisheries, offshore installations), public sector
and civil society conduct experiments in a multifunctional space and collaborate around joint
data acquisition and utilization.
Governance &
Sustainable offshore governance in the context of rapid climate change.
adaptive mgt

Table 3 - Case study East
Characteristics
Ecosystem: The Baltic Sea is the world’s largest body of brackish water, with unique ecosystems and habitats,
created by the combination of large freshwater input from rivers and the very restricted exchange with the open
ocean, through the Danish straits. The Baltic proper is eutrophicated, with high primary production (including
Harmful Algal Blooms, HABs) and drastic cycles of hypoxia during the past 30 years, which in some places have
12

turned into permanent hypoxia and anoxic bottom conditions (Shahabi et al., 2022). This is ruining crucial habitats,
such as spawning grounds for cod, and in addition causes a chemical feedback loop with large leakage nutrients
from the sediments.
Economy and users: The Baltic Proper is one of the most heavily trafficked seaways in the world, with great
importance to international trade and to the national security interests of the countries in the region. Sweden has the
largest EEZ, including the central area surrounding Gotland. The region is traditionally and recently the focus of
intense military and security concerns. Gotland is often regarded as one of the weak spots in Sweden’s military
defense. International trade and connection are also intense along the sea bottom, with interconnectors for
communication and electricity, and with the contentious gas pipelines Nord Stream 1 & 2, which run through the
Swedish EEZ to the East of Gotland. Sweden has extensive plans for offshore wind farms, including in the shallower
areas around Gotland, and some areas may be deemed adequate for sand extraction. Commercial fishing takes place
over wide areas. The catch is to a large extent used for animal feed. The tourism industry is large around the whole
of Baltic Proper, including Gotland.
Society and governance: Gotland is Sweden’s largest island, located in the centre of the Baltic Proper. While the
island has only around 60,000 permanent inhabitants, it receives over a million tourists on a yearly basis, mainly
during the summer season. A substantial share of the summer population is made up of seasonally returning house
owners. This group has increased following the pandemic and extended its presence throughout the year. Seasonality
and changing demographics are substantial challenges for management of resources and services. There are no areas
beyond jurisdiction of EU member states in the Baltic Sea (except areas under Russian jurisdiction), which means
that all water is covered by the EU Marine Strategic Framework Directive (MSFD) and the Water Framework
Directive (WFD). HELCOM, however, includes Russian waters and cooperates with the EU.
Issues
• The area around Gotland is an intense hotspot for a mixture of complex and highly international issues.
• Working for the restoration of more resilient ecosystems and climate change mitigation and adaption,
while also managing multi-sector and multi-national interests, including trade, fisheries, and energy
security.
• Omni-present and now increasing military concerns.
Stakeholders
C2B2 LivingLab lead: SEI
Public sector: Region Stockholm, Blue Centre Gotland, County Administrative Board Gotland, Region Gotland,
Municipality of Gotland, HELCOM, SwAM, SEPA, SMA, SEA, Svenska kraftnät, Geological
Survey of Sweden
Private sector: LifeFinder Syst. International AB, Sensative AB, Fossil Free Marine Europe AB, Ecobarge
Sweden AB, Marell Boats AB, Terntank AB, Cetasol AB, Sveavind Offshore AB, Sweden Pelagic
Federation, Hitachi Energy AB, SeaTwirl AB, Fossil Free Marine Europe AB, Clinton Marine
Survey AB, Windeed AB,, Combine AB
Civil society: Sportfiskarna, Initiativ Utö, Svenska Båtunionen, Stockholms Ornitologiska förening,
Skärgårdsstiftelsen i Stockholms län, Sveriges Organiserade Fiskeguider, Nämdö Green
Archipelago, Nordiska skärgårdssamarbetet, The Swedish Society for Nature Conservation
(SSNC), WWF, Algal Bloom citizen science
Academia: SIME, UGOT, CIT, WMU, IHE, Chalmers
Objectives of the LivingLab East
Scientific Improved understanding, based on new data sources, including citizen-based approaches, to
ecosystem &
monitor ecosystem health, increase predictability and reduce impacts on society, for example
climate
tourism losses due to algal blooms. Explore how human offshore presence (e.g. energy,
shipping) and economic activity can co-exist with ecosystem resilience, and even have a
positive impact on biodiversity.
Technological
Shared data acquisition – private, citizen-science, and public actors - in offshore settings to
understand opportunities for multifunctional regenerative interventions and improve
predictability of ecosystem effects.
Governance &
Connecting small, medium and large-scale actors, operating in new and upcoming marine
adaptive mgt
industries and their value chains. Develop mechanisms for predictable and realistic conditions
for sustainable management of the offshore environment in an intensely international and
geopolitically sensitive context.

13

Table 4 - Case study West
Characteristics
Ecosystem: The area is characterized by its extensive archipelago, oceanic salinity, generally well-oxygenated
bottom-water and very high benthic and pelagic biodiversity as well as a complexity of food-webs. This is due to
the area’s connectivity to the North Sea and the Atlantic, contributing to large biodiversity through dispersal of (1)
deep-sea species; (2) shallow-water and pelagic species through coastal and oceanic currents; and (3) populations
of marine sea-birds from the North Sea. Despite present and emerging environmental problems and user-conflicts,
this area has generally been classified as the Swedish region having the best environmental status (Marine Strategy
Framework Directive) as well as ecological status (Water Framework Directive). The area hosts Sweden’s only
marine national park (Kosterhavet, bordering the Norwegian national park Hvaler) and substantial parts of the
Swedish contribution to the Habitats Directive Natura 2000-network of protected areas.
Economy and users: There are numerous overlapping interest such as shipping, energy production,
pipelines/cables, fisheries, recreational interests and conservation values. Ships bunker fuel here both at port and out
at sea and the main part of Sweden´s fishing fleet is located and operating from here. Vessels from Norway, Denmark
and Germany also fish here on EU agreements. Port of Gothenburg is by far Scandinavia’s largest industrial port
and many shipping companies and related businesses has their base for operations here. In many ways, this sea is
the “gateway” to the other ocean basins.
Society and governance: The West coast hosts both Sweden’s second largest city as well as rural coastal areas, the
latter often with very high seasonality in population. The area features governance innovation and experiments with
integrative and participatory character such as collaboration plans for coastal sustainability and conservation, coastal
planning and integrated coastal zone management in the Gothenburg region and Northern Bohuslän. In northern
Bohuslän a unique cooperative model for fisheries regulation has been accomplished by the “Koster-Väderöfjord
agreement” and Co-management Norra Bohuslän (Cedergren et al. 2020, Piriz, 2004 and 2005). Moreover, the
municipalities in the area were the first in Sweden to carry out extensive physical planning of their ocean space. The
closeness to Norway and Kosterhavets National park’s “sister” park of Hvaler has sparked numerous cross border
collaboration projects. The Boarder Committee of Svinesund (a border committee under the Nordic Council of
Ministers) has taken a particular interest in the blue economy and its possibilities as a cross border growing businesssector (Lundgren et al 2020). Although many human activities occur along the coastline, it is for example common
for recreational sailors to cross over to Denmark via Kattegat or to Norway via Skagerrak and many coastal people
and tourists have a relation also to the open sea.
Issues
• Conflict of goals between conservation of biodiversity and both old and emerging blue sectors, as well as
between fisheries and the emerging offshore wind power sector.
• Keeping the relatively high environmental status at the same time as the blue economy is growing. This
includes looking at the land-sea interactions to analyze how infrastructure on land affects the possibilities
of development in the offshore zone.
• Strong ocean currents and rapid bio-fouling means that data acquisition is especially challenging. Currents
also cause a massive occurrence of marine litter in the area.
Stakeholders
C2B2 LivingLab lead: CIT
Public sector: County Administrative Board Västra Götaland and Koster Sea National Park, Region Västra
Götaland, City of Gothenburg,, Sotenäs Municipality and Symbiosis Center, Fiskekommunerna,
Svinesundskommittén, 8-Fjords, OSPAR, SwAM, SEPA, SMA, Svenska kraftnät, Geological
Survey of Sweden
Private sector: Fisheries Co-Management North Bohuslän, Sweden Pelagic federation, SeaTwirl AB, Hitachi
Energy, Vinga Konstruktion AB Bottenlusen, LifeFinder Systems International AB, Sensative,
Ecobarge Sweden AB, Clinton Marine Survey AB, Terntank, Cetasol AB, Zephyr Renewable AB,
Inocean AB, Combine AB, Mooringo AB
Civil society: Sportfiskarna, Gullmarn secondary school, Koster Seafloor Observatory, Sailing4Science, The
Swedish Society for Nature Conservation (SSNC), WWF, Keep Sweden Tidy, Strandstädarna
Academia: SIME, IHE, UGOT, Lighthouse (Chalmers), SWPTC (Chalmers)
Objectives of the LivingLab West
Scientific Improved understanding on the effect of fisheries and offshore wind farms on biodiversity based
ecosystem &
on additional/new data sources.
climate
Technological Improved offshore data coverage, by expanding both acquisition and uptake of data from robots,
& innovation
ships-of-opportunity and offshore installations. Expanded usage of methods critical for
14

Governance &
adaptive
management

biodiversity (e.g., eDNA, image analysis by AI). Effective socio-ecological models and digital
twins.
Incorporating socio-ecological models and digital twins in local and regional governance. Develop
mechanisms for high stakeholder involvement and acceptance for resolving competition between
fisheries, offshore wind power and conservation.

2.4 C2B2 advance beyond the State of the Art
Overall, C2B2 aims to bring about transformative change through participatory governance supported by relevant and
insightful data and knowledge by re-imagining the role of quintuple helix actors across the blue economy in processes
‘from data to knowledge to decisions and action’. C2B2 will implement its approach in three demonstration cases in
real-life settings in the three main marine basins in Sweden, providing the basis for substantial theoretical and practical
advances. Our co-created science-based ocean governance will include key stakeholders from the outset and extend
current multi-stakeholder participation in marine environmental management with the sound integration of science,
technology and innovation.
The overall C2B2 approach provides a major advance beyond the current State of Art by
i) going beyond a single-sector approach,
ii) implementing the quintuple helix concept at a practical level by using data to ‘give nature a voice’;
iii) extending the LivingLabs co-creation methodology to the complex setting of the sustainable blue economy,
iv) practicing responsible Action Research by initiating and developing these co-creation processes and embedding
them as routines for participatory governance, to ensure the adoption of collaborative and adaptive management
practices beyond the C2B2 programme lifetime, and
v) establishing a continuously evolving knowledge system for science-based ecosystem governance.
This provides the basis for paving the way for transitions towards governing multiple demands in increasingly claimed
and fragile marine ecosystems. The extensive demonstration and validation of this approach in C2B2 means this can
also be replicated elsewhere in Sweden and internationally.
Furthermore, C2B2 will provide progress beyond the current State of the Art in the following specific areas.
Land-Sea interactions
Current SoA: What we can do out at sea is to a large extent decided by how we plan and use our coastline. Activities
in our off shore zone depend on infrastructure and materials on and from land. There is a growing competition along
our coastline between real estate development in attractive locations on the one hand, and infrastructure for industry on
the other. Ports and maintenance facilities are being pushed away further from cities and other infrastructure, hindering
the development of offshore activities and services. The development and establishment of underwater cables, wind
turbines and other equipment out at sea also requires connections to, and infrastructure on, land.
C2B2 advance beyond SoA: The value of the blue economy may originate from an offshore area in terms of i.e. biomass
uptake, but the value chain very much continues on land where the larger part of the value is created. Hence, when we
are discussing the blue economy, we also need to consider value chains and value chains certainly move up on land. In
the C2B2 programme, we will therefore look at the connections between the value generated in the offshore area,
mapping specific value chains, and thus mapping how potential new governance methods would affect the generated
value, job opportunities and of course the environment. This includes understanding how existing value chains in
traditionally land-based sectors in Sweden could become part of new sustainable blue value chains (e.g., water and
wastewater treatment, modular plug-in approaches, electrical appliances, IT, tourism).
Quantifying effects of offshore installations on biodiversity
Current SoA: Biodiversity is increasingly recognised as a fundamental aspect of a healthy ocean and a cornerstone for
marine ecosystem services and a sustainable blue economy. Correspondingly, the importance of surveying and
monitoring marine biodiversity is increasingly accepted. Currently this is done by means of identifying species in
samples of water or sediment, and to some extent in images/videos. This time-consuming work requires highly trained
specialists. Strict prioritising is necessary, in terms of species, sampling frequency and spatial cover. The detrimental
effect on biodiversity from large scale and intense fisheries has been established, including from trawling. The same can
be said about the effect from intensely trafficked seaways and ports, including from smaller boats and marinas. While
the environment of the (shallow) offshore domain is now being transformed by the rapid expansion of permanent
installations in the shape of wind farms, very little is known about the effects on biodiversity by offshore installations.
C2B2 advance beyond SoA: C2B2 will address this gap by providing baselines for biodiversity and realistic methods
for effective monitoring during the full life cycle of offshore wind farms. C2B2 will show how data intense and broad
sampling methods (like eDNA and video analysis using AI) will allow for quantification of possible detrimental effects
15

on biodiversity during construction, operation and decommissioning. It will also allow quantification of the much
speculated about possible positive effects on biodiversity from wind farms, by the introduction of hard surfaces (artificial
reefs) and by shifting spatial usage away from detrimental fisheries and shipping.
Use of open by design, multi-purpose offshore infrastructure
Current SoA: Multipurpose offshore infrastructure is increasingly hailed as a way to address issues arising from the
multiple demands placed in coasts and seas, while meeting growing demands through the integration of various user
functions in a single unit (Schupp et al., 2019). Large and small offshore, multifunctional solutions (incl. floating) are
increasingly highlighted as viable options for providing services (Dafforn et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2018) while
improving effective resource use, decreasing economic risks for investors, and avoiding potential conflict over land
disputes as they are perceived as less intrusive to existing land-based socio-economic activity. The most known example
is that of Multi-Purpose Platforms (MPPs) or Multi-Use Platforms (MUPs), which are offshore platforms serving the
needs of multiple offshore industries (e.g., energy and aquaculture). These platforms aim at exploiting the synergies and
managing the tensions arising when closely co-locating systems from these industries (Abhinav et al., 2020). The
literature in MPPs and MUPs is however, relatively recent, and there are many aspects that are yet to be explored and
contextualized, including the connection between multifunctionality and open by design. Moreover, there is an
important local element connected to regulations, permits, and the web of actors involved in the marine space, which
make it fundamental to assess multifunctional interventions on a case base (Przedrzymirska et al., 2021).
C2B2 advance beyond SoA: C2B2 will advance knowledge of multifunctional interventions, including the potential of
less explored characteristics such as modularity, mobility and open by design. This includes exploring the conditions
which can allow organizations across sectors in the marine space to design open and multifunctional services and
applications, but also, whether and how open and multifunctional services and applications can in turn enhance synergies
through collaboration among actors and ultimately change the way we plan, govern and monitor our seas. An important
characteristic of open by design is agility – the ability to adapt or reconfigure production systems (Gligor et al., 2019).
C2B2 will explore what more agile blue systems could look like, whether in the deployment of offshore monitoring
devices, in the business model of a firm, or in the design of marine spatial plans.
Open data collection platforms for knowledge co-creation
Current SoA: Both in Europe and globally, there has been huge progress during the last decade towards harmonising
and collaborating on marine environmental monitoring, and subsequently aggregating and making the data openly
available. This creates superior value and usefulness for any given monitoring effort. However, just as importantly,
collaboration on marine environmental monitoring creates (and indeed requires) close partnerships across boundaries
of organisations and countries. We are starting to see cross-fertilisation of ambitious multi-actor efforts in the full
process of knowledge creation, tackling issues of increasing complexity and scope. However, these partnerships around
marine data collection are currently still limited to established public agencies and academia, and they do not yet include
the private sector and civil society sufficiently. Truly open platforms for data collection create (and indeed require) close
partnerships between a wider range of new actors from different sectors of society, in order to solve technological and
operational challenges.
C2B2 advance beyond SoA: C2B2 will demonstrate technically and operationally open platforms for data collection.
By doing so, we will show that the current benefits of partnerships between established monitoring agencies and
professionals can be taken to a new level by including the private sector and civil society. Most importantly, new actors
will raise new questions re. what data should be collected, how, and why. C2B2 will break up established assumptions
of what ocean knowledge we need and who will be involved in co-creating that knowledge.
Marine data stewardship
Current SoA: Marine environmental data are today often aggregated at international joint services, for the benefit of
all organisations and individuals. The EU has been very active in promoting this, under the Copernicus umbrella and
with services like EMODnet and SeaDataNet. Aggregation and openness mean that well-designed methods and
protocols for both data provision and extraction are absolutely essential, including machine-to-machine interfaces (APIs,
Application Programming Interfaces). Experienced data professionals at traditional monitoring organisation (for
example SMHI in Sweden) set up new data streams, make adjustments and amendments to existing streams, and
routinely run into issues and challenges that have to be solved. The data aggregating services offer support and help
functions ('data stewardship') for both, data suppliers and data users, and they provide education and capacity building,
primarily to public agencies. The possibility of including data sources outside of dedicated national monitoring agencies,
for example those from Citizen Science and from industry, have gained recent attention. Correspondingly, the EU also
wants its aggregated data to be used (and provided) by a wider set of organisations and individuals, outside of the
traditional realm of large national agencies and academia. However, expanding the group of data users and providers to
more actors and new sectors will generate a radically expanding need for data stewardship, which is currently not
available. Such data stewardship will require more than education. It will require continuous attention and support,
16

including with nitty-gritty details such as file formatting. Such stewardship will require both competencies and time at
a level that can only be expected in-house in large organisations but not in smaller organisations, incl. civil society.
C2B2 advance beyond SoA: C2B2 will focus strongly on data, as expressed in our motto ‘from data to knowledge to
decisions & actions’, see sections 2.2 and 2.3. In a quintuple helix (academia, industry, public sector, civil society,
natural environment), four of the branches can be represented by people and organisations, but the natural environment
can only be represented by data. C2B2 will reach its vision to a large extent by letting people from different sectors
provide and use marine data, to interpret and create knowledge from marine data, and to take action they believe in. We
are absolutely convinced of the transformative power of opening up this process, but at the same time we are acutely
aware of the data-related challenges involved in doing so. C2B2 will facilitate marine data stewardship for all actors,
including new providers and/or users of marine data. Central for this effort are our partners Swedish National Data
Service (SND) and SMHI, which is Sweden’s designated National Oceanographic Data Centre. SND and SMHI will
work within C2B2 to set up a national structure for marine data stewardship.
Participatory governance
Current SoA: Governance research across various fields increasingly agrees on a number of basic characteristics,
principles and requirements for successfully addressing the challenges identified earlier for governing for a better blue
in a changing sea and climate: integration across sectors, knowledge types, disciplines, governance tiers, geographical
boundaries and scales to match to the issues to address; experimentation, adaptation and learning to address
uncertainties, participation, inclusiveness and empowerment, legitimacy and transparency, capacity and resources
(Bohman, 2019; Halbe and Pahl-Wostl, 2019; Karlsson, 2019; Loorbach, 2010; Prutzer, et al., 2021; Wehn. et al., 2018).
Yet a deeper understanding of governance gaps and development needs, and what needs to be prioritised, both in specific
cases and in Sweden in general, is still missing.
C2B2 advance beyond SoA: The combined bottom up and top down approach of C2B2 will generate the scientific
understanding of how we can move from single-use, single-sector practices towards truly integrative, multifunctional
ecosystem-based governance. Existing theory, analysis of existing multi-level governance structures, approaches and
resources (principles, agreements, directives; legislation, strategies and policies, financial resources, MSP, integrated
and sector management), scenarios of transition, comparative policy-based tools and international collaboration will be
combined with emerging insights from actual practice related to participatory governance and adaptive management in
the LivingLabs. This will allow C2B2 to generate a better understanding of the (often region- and place-specific) landsea linkages of key economic activities and the distribution of benefits, costs and regulations, mandates and
responsibilities along these lines, and where radical changes and where incremental adjustments to the status quo can
lead to beneficial outcomes for society and biodiversity. C2B2 will provide a provide a global to local perspective on
good practices for MSP and integrative marine and coastal management.

3. Benefits to society
The C2B2 programme has been specifically designed to deliver a ‘co-created better blue’ which - by its very design consists of highly developed collaboration with the users of the research results, namely the diverse set of stakeholders
involved in multi-level participatory governance of the ocean. In its demonstration activities, C2B2 directly works with
blue economy sector actors; citizens, communities (from diverse backgrounds) and civil society organisations;
municipalities and local authorities; regional and national agencies and policy and decision makers; scientists from
diverse disciplines as well as (commercial) data aggregators, technology developers and SMEs. Moreover, the C2B2
programme will generate a range of benefits to society beyond those delivered for stakeholders in the demonstration
cases: social by reshaping our relationship with the ocean and benefiting broad groups; institutional by enabling crosssectoral dialogue, enhancing marine spatial planning via multi-functionality and contributing to Sweden’s digitization
strategy; and economic by contributing to enhancing Sweden’s competitiveness and prosperity.
Reshaping our relationship with the ocean
One of the specific aims of C2B2 is to reshape our (societal) relationship with the ocean. ‘Being out there’ in various
forms and more permanently means a larger part of society has a stake in the ocean. C2B2 will instil new ways of
working together and practicing science-based participatory ocean governance, so that more actors and individuals
have a direct stake offshore. This will affect place-based social cohesion and relations to the sea including stronger
social, cultural and economic links to the offshore environment, sustainable employment opportunities and value chains
within an increasingly sustainable blue economy. Moreover, the C2B2 approach is inherently inclusive, equitable and
gender-equal (see also section 4) and the programme – during its very implementation – is designed to benefit not merely
the ‘privileged few’ but broad groups that otherwise often remain disadvantaged and/or excluded from governance
relevant processes, economic opportunities and cultural experiences, including those related to the ocean.
Enabling cross-sectoral dialogue in Sweden
Expectations about the services and resources that can be derived from our seas and the opportunities for job creation
and economic growth derived from these activities seem to grow with every new outlook. This raises concerns over the
17

future health of the ocean. In Sweden, the North Sea and the Baltic Sea have long been important spaces for economic
development and trade and are expected to play a vital role in the transition to a fossil-free society. However, they also
face serious environmental impacts that jeopardize ocean health, which is the basis for a sustainable blue economy.
There is an urgent need to find solutions to common challenges and break away from sectoral thinking. Such an approach
requires a fundamental shift in how our ocean is valued and exploited and an integrated and adaptive ecosystem-based
management for our seas. This is highly ambitious since such an approach demands better alignment of regulations,
planning, and monitoring criteria with ecosystem boundaries. It demands a fundamental shift in how we organize and
utilize the marine space that goes beyond prioritizing economic growth only, to ensuring a more effective delivery of
multiple gains for society, the environment, and climate.
It is therefore fundamental to understand both the status as well as the potential of the sustainable blue economy. If we
neglect the industrial and economic expansion towards marine areas and fail to integrate the ecosystem approach with
a socio-economic one, there is a risk of unplanned growth at the expense of marine ecosystems and social justice. Thus,
the proposed C2B2 programme provides the unique opportunity to talk and learn about a growing sustainable blue
economy, if we are to avoid the same mistakes committed onshore. C2B2 will enable this dialogue and tackle difficult
conversations by creating an environment of collaboration and creativity.
Enhancing marine spatial planning in Sweden
There is a need to include the biosphere into our forecasts of a sustainable blue economy and move beyond the dominant
single-use and single-sector paradigm. This demands a move towards approaches that can facilitate the combination of
activities for multiple social, economic and environmental gains.
Multifunctional planning is highlighted in both research (Przedrzymirska et al., 2021) as well as in national policy (HaV,
2020; Miljömålsbereddningen 2020; Nyström Sandman et al., 2020) and local management (Schubert et al., 2018) as a
potential planning mechanism to ensure more sustainable marine practices. Multifunctional planning through co-use,
coexistence, or co-location of activities and resources offers a way out of the silo paradigm (Schupp et al., 2019).
Multifunctionality is closely related to the ecosystem approach through a systems perspective. However,
multifunctionality goes beyond landscape traits to also incorporate human-made artifacts, value chains and services
(Barquet & Green, 2022).
Marine spatial planning provides a clear entry point to operationalize multifunctionality, in that it is foreseen to help
optimize ‘the use of marine space to benefit economic development and the marine environment’ (European
Commission, 2008). It is closely related to resource-sharing, which makes it an important instrument of circular
economy, and has therefore received increased attention and support from the EU Commission (though still absent in
the Marine Framework Directive).
An important part of multifunctionality is the shift away from sectoral goals towards a mission-oriented approach
(European Commission, nd). This demands a shift in focus from ad hoc investments, such as single purpose
infrastructure, towards actions that are steered towards transformational changes - such as the development of new
general-purpose and cross-sectoral solutions (Mazzucato, 2016). C2B2 will pave the way by demonstrating how this
can be done in practice.
Contributing to Sweden’s digitalization strategy
An important part of the Swedish governance system is its aim to connect decision-making with scientific evidence,
where data is seen as an increasingly important prerequisite for innovation, sustainable growth, and reduced resource
consumption.
The goal of a science-informed governance system is reflected in the country’s national strategy to become a world
leader in data-sharing, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and digital innovation with the aim of strengthening welfare,
competitiveness and a sustainable society (Regeringen, 2021).
Transforming data to knowledge is a central aspect in the transition towards smart maritime governance. For instance,
SwAM’s report for Marine Spatial Plan in Skagerrak and Kattegat highlighted that better knowledge of cumulative
effects on ecosystem values are found near the coast due to higher data availability (SwAM, 2018). Thus, incorporating
mapping results of marine values and involving academic actors are priorities to increase knowledge generation and
reduce uncertainty in the marine spatial planning process (Karlsson, 2019).
Recent experiences from the Nordic Innovation Organization showed that hackathons are prominent tools aimed at
promoting visibility of public data and establishing synergy between multiple societal sectors by working together
towards a common goal. These activities can contribute to Sweden’s efforts of connecting knowledge with private sector
initiatives in order to develop innovative solutions for the blue economy. Results from this can contribute to promoting
Sweden’s leadership in digitalization and responsible use of open data.
In line with the Green Deal, C2B2 will contribute to Destination Earth Initiative - the EU’s next step to develop a
Digital Twin of the Ocean. The Digital Twin Ocean's ambition is to make ocean knowledge readily available to citizens,
entrepreneurs, scientists and policymakers to design the most effective ways to restore marine and coastal habitats,
18

support a sustainable blue economy and mitigate and adapt to climate change. C2B2 will strengthen marine data
stewardship, paving the way from Data – Knowledge – Decisions & Actions.
At a broader level, C2B2 will promote advanced technology, which can help address complex problems and demands.
Data and digitalization used in governance and planning provides opportunities to contribute to new understandings on
the interactions between ecosystems and human activities, as well as new means for monitoring and use of marine
resources and the impacts from such use.
Promoting Sweden’s competitiveness and prosperity
Europe’s blue economy provides 4.5 million direct jobs and is a fast-moving segment of the EU economy (European
Commission et al., 2021). The blue economy has modernised, diversified and innovative sectors have evolved providing
new prospects and creating jobs. This trend is expected to follow in the rest of the world, so that by 2030 the blue
economy is expected to double both in terms of value added and employment but with a high risk of ocean ecosystem
degradation.
Shipping is the most important sector of the Swedish blue economy, with a yearly turnover of 85 billion SEK. More
importantly, around 90 % of Sweden’s export and import of goods pass through Swedish ports, and in addition 67
million persons per year (Maritime Cluster of West Sweden, 2022). Ongoing research and innovation efforts are
focusing on the dramatic challenge of maintaining this lifeline, while at the same time improve sustainability, including
the shift to fossil free shipping (Lighthouse, 2021). C2B2 will bring together key stakeholders and the most active
research environments in co-creation in three LivingLabs focused on some of the most crucial shipping areas for
Sweden, exposing the urgent efforts of the shipping sector to the realism of competing or possibly synergetic interests
of the other main sectors of the expanding blue economy.
Fisheries today are a much lesser economic activity in Sweden, corresponding to about 1.4 billion SEK per year
(Fiskbranschens Riksförbund, 2022). The sector used to contribute with a significant part of Sweden’s food supply
(historically even a crucial role for city populations’ survival) and maintains strong local importance. Currently the
Swedish offshore fishery is largely disconnected from the main value chains in Sweden, with Swedish catches being
landed abroad and used as animal feed, while the Swedish sea food industry uses imported catch and cultivated fish
(Hornborg et al. 2021). The current emphasis on producing seafood by aquaculture is focusing on the coastal zone,
because of the much larger physical and logistical challenges offshore. C2B2 will provide knowledge about how a
sustainable fishing sector can exist in tomorrow’s blue economy. C2B2 will do this by focusing on high nutrient and
novel seafood, on innovation and multifunctionality, and on viable value chains in three areas with widely different
characteristics, both environmentally and economically.
Tourism is a very important sector in the Swedish economy, contributing to about 10 % of both BNP and employment
(Maritime Cluster of West Sweden, 2022), with a large share focused in coastal areas. Marine offshore tourism is a
small segment, possibly of emerging significance. C2B2 will demonstrate new forms of sustainable tourism in the
offshore domain. More accessible technology and infrastructure (sensors, cameras, communication, automation,
robotics) together with fossil free boating has the power to transform marine offshore tourism into a broad activity,
centered around experiencing marine life, history and archelogy, citizen science and technology (not necessarily
expensive or fast boats). C2B2 will demonstrate that Sweden both has the offshore sites that can rival the most exotic
places on land (both on site and from the sofa) and the knowledge to create a new technologically advanced and
sustainable tourism segment.
Marine renewable energy production is listed as an established sector by the European Commission and the EU now
has a total installed offshore wind capacity of 15 GW across 11 countries (European Commission, 2021). Even though
Europe is by far the world leader, Sweden is currently a long way behind the leading European countries. Sweden plans
to change this dramatically within the coming two decades. Sweden’s current wind power capacity of around 10 GW
(almost all on land) is set to more than double by 2040, mostly by expansion offshore (Svensk Vindenergi, 2021). The
transforming power of this should not to be underestimated. The wide introduction of hard surfaces and stable mounts,
of access to power and to fast data communication will transform how Sweden interacts with its offshore domain. C2B2
will demonstrate the far-reaching scope for cascading effects and opportunities in the offshore energy economy. An
illustrative and much mentioned example (e.g. European Commission, 2021) is the prospect of co-locating offshore
wind farms and aquaculture, possibly upending the challenges mentioned above. However, C2B2 will demonstrate that
the synergetic effects can transform all sectors of Sweden’s blue economy, including shipping and tourism, as well as
our capacity to monitor and create knowledge about the ocean environment. The vast majority of existing plans (and all
mature plans) for offshore wind in Sweden are for bottom-fixed solutions. Given the huge implications of the existing
plans, we believe it will be sufficiently challenging to consider these within C2B2. Among our associated partners we
also have leading expertise in floating offshore wind solutions, which is increasingly looking like a possible game
changer in the (not so distant) future.

19

4. Management and organisation
The overall C2B2 governance structure has been designed for effective and efficient programme delivery via strategic,
executive and operational levels and is illustrated in figure 4.
C2B2 is hosted by the University of Gothenburg (UGOT), which will appoint the programme board in consultation
with, and following approval by, Mistra. The programme board will be responsible for the strategic management of
C2B2 (incl. for the 10% reserve from the budget, as requested by Mistra) and take decisions to be implemented by the
subordinate programme director. The responsibilities of the programme host, the board and the programme director are
clearly stated in the instructions for Mistra programmes and will be implemented accordingly.
The programme host UGOT is Sweden’s most important marine university, host to a number of organisations and
centres of paramount importance for science-based ocean governance, including the Swedish Institute for the Marine
Environment (SIME) and the Swedish National Data Service (SND). UGOT is furthermore alma mater to the largest
share of marine professionals in Sweden, including many of the staff at Swedish Agency for the Marine and Water
Management (SwAM) and the marine section of Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute (SMHI), with its
offices located in Gothenburg.
Final responsibility for programme execution and the delivery of the programme outputs rests with the host. C2B2 will
be embedded in Sweden’s largest university (by numbers of students 2021). UGOT will support the programme
management with its dedicated functions for HR, legal affairs (including agreements), procurements, communication
and media technology.
Administratively, C2B2
will be embedded in the
UGOT
Faculty
of
Science,
at
the
Department of Marine
Sciences (DMS), which
is the node of UGOT’s
marine profile area,
ensuring
close
connection with all
relevant
scientific
disciplines.
The
department will support
C2B2 with financial
control,
including
communication
with
financial staff of partners
Figure 4 C2B2 governance structure
and associated partners.
C2B2 will work very closely with UGOT Centre for Sea and Society (hosted by DMS), ensuring close engagement of
key societal stakeholders and the transdisciplinary research being fostered by the centre. C2B2 will furthermore
work closely with UGOT Marine Infrastructure (also hosted by DMS), which includes two research stations
(Kristineberg Center for Marine Research and Innovation and Tjärnö Marine Laboratory) and a large research vessel
(R/V Skagerak)
C2B2 is managed by means of coordinating and instilling efficient decision making, by monitoring progress, by
facilitating collaboration and synergies across the WPs and LivingLabs, and by proactively preventing and resolving
conflicts. The management aims are:
- compliance with the programme plan and consortium agreement (= we do what we said we would do),
- efficient use of programme resources (= we do not waste resources)
- communication and dissemination of programme results (= outcomes and impacts are what count)
Programme management and communication are operationalized in WP 5 (led by the programme director). To achieve
the management aims, the programme director has an executive programme management team, made up of
- the scientific lead (SL), who serves as deputy PD, responsible for the overall C2B2 conceptual coherence and
the coordination of the transdisciplinary research processes across the WPs and in the LivingLabs, and also
leads WP 4,
- the communication lead (CL),
- the leads of WP 1 – 3 and the leaders of the three LivingLabs.
The programme director, the scientific lead and the communication leader make up the highest executive level, working
side by side on a daily basis. The full management team will have formal meetings at least every month, and more
frequently during intense coordination periods.
20

The proposed PD is Dr. Torsten Linders, who is already centrally positioned in the dynamic cross-sector marine
innovation around UGOT. Linders is currently coordinating both Ocean Data Factory Sweden (ODF) and Swedish
Centre for Ocean Observing Technology (SCOOT), which are the arenas from which the C2B2 consortium has grown.
The proposed SL is Prof. Uta Wehn, who is Associate Professor of Water Innovation Studies at IHE Delft in the
Netherlands, and a world leading expert on co-creation, open science and citizen science in water and environment.
Wehn is also the Adlerbert Visiting Professor of Marine Citizen Science at UGOT.
The proposed CL is Maria Holmkvist, who is the leading communicator of both the Maritime Cluster of West Sweden
and the UGOT Centre for Sea and Society. In Sweden, Holmkvist has unrivalled experience both in marine science
communication and in facilitating cross-sector interaction in the marine domain.
The leaders of the WPs are WP1 - Prof. Mats Lindegart (UGOT), WP2 – Prof. Mikael Lind (RISE), WP3 - Dr.
Andrea Morf (SIME) and WP4 - Prof. Uta Wehn (IHE). The leaders of the LivingLabs are North – Prof. Nick
Kamenos (UMF), East – Dr. Karina Barquet (SEI) and West - Jessica Hjerpe Olausson (CIT).
The programme management team works in close communication with all C2B2 partners. All partners are represented
in the C2B2 Partner group, which will meet jointly at least twice a year, to ensure coherent and joint vision and
understanding of the programme activities.
The Stakeholder reference board is made up of representatives of 25 confirmed associated partners. All 13 C2B2
partners have contributed to recruiting the current associated partners who will also work in different WPs,
including in the LivingLabs. This board will meet jointly with the C2B2 Partner group at least once a year.
The CL supports the PD with internal communication (as well as external), which will be of pivotal importance, given
the large group of C2B2 partners and associated partners and the intense collaboration needed to deliver the programme
outputs. During the programme period, we will actively encourage and invite more stakeholders to join the work in
C2B2, especially the LivingLabs and the Stakeholder reference board. The CL has a crucial role in this outreach.
All deliverables will be subjected to quality control before being released, by technical experts not involved in the
deliverable production. These experts are assigned by the PD or the SL. The PD is responsible for ensuring that all
partners and associated partners are aware of programme procedures. The SL is responsible for regular review of
cumulative results of T4.5 (Peer learning & Capacity Building) and T4.6 (Evaluation) and to initiate appropriate adaptive
action as needed. For all formal meetings arranged by the programme, an agenda will be prepared along with a brief
note describing the background to the agenda items, and the issues expected to be discussed and resolved. This will be
distributed in advance to all participants in the meeting.
The PD is responsible for fostering a good working environment of the programme (not inflicting on the formal
responsibilities of any organisation as employer). The PD is in this respect advised by the relevant functions at UGOT.
Collaboration is at the heart of the C2B2 vision and reflected in the programme activities. The C2B2 partners, and most
of all, the partners making up the programme management team, have jointly prepared this proposed programme plan.
Before the programme start, a consortium agreement will be drafted by UGOT’s legal office and then thoroughly
discussed and agreed by the consortium. The joint preparation and detailed understanding of the programme plan and
the consortium agreement form the basis for minimizing disagreements and conflicts within C2B2. Internal
communication channels and the joint meetings for partners and associated partners are important tools for sharing
updates about progress and challenges, and thus preventing misunderstandings, disagreements and conflicts. The CL
has a crucial role here. WP leaders have a responsibility to work proactively for preventing conflicts in their WPs, for
promptly acting when needed and for reporting to the PD and the executive team. The LivingLab leaders, who firstly
communicate with the WP 4 leader (i.e. the SL), have the corresponding responsibilities. Final authority to resolve
disagreements rests with the programme board. Gothenburg Centre for Sustainable Development (GMV) is UGOT’s
and Chalmers’ joint centre for practical implementation of sustainable development at these universities. The PD is
responsible for C2B2 making use of the extensive resources and support available at GMV and for C2B2’s adherence
to UGOT’s current (and updated) policies about climate footprint (“Implementera Klimatramverket”, vice-chancellor
decision 2020-February-27), and about gender, equality and inclusion (“JiGU”, vice-chancellor decision 2020-May-26).

5. Skills and networks
The consortium brings together key partners with the core skills and competences needed to implement the
transition towards co-created science-based ocean governance (see also Table 5):
1. University of Gothenburg (UGOT) conducts Sweden’s broadest research on marine ecosystems and the ocean’s role in
the climate system and the economy and society.
2. Research Institute of Sweden (RISE) conducts research in close collaboration with industry and public sector. RISE
Maritime provides C2B2 with competence and network in all established and emerging offshore sectors.
3. Chalmers is one of Europe’s leading technological universities, with Sweden’s strongest research in maritime technology,
e.g. hosting the Swedish Wind Power Technology Centre. Chalmers also hosts Lighthouse, which is the neutral
collaboration platform for research, development and innovation in the maritime sector of Sweden.
21

4. Swedish Institute for the Marine Environment (SIME) brings together five Swedish marine universities, acting as a
transdisciplinary knowledge provider for Swedish authorities and society, notably the Swedish Agency for Marine and
Water Management, and has expertise in related policy processes.
5. Chalmers Industriteknik Group (CIT) conducts research and development with the aim of strengthening Swedish
innovation capacity and utilizing research.
6. Umeå Marine Sciences Centre (UMF) is a unit at Umeå University. UMF is Sweden’s primary competence centre of
marine ecosystem and climate of the northern part of the Baltic Sea (Gulf of Bothnia).
7. Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI) is an international research and policy organization bridging science and policy.
SEI has seven centres outside of Sweden, including one in Estonia and two in the UK. Through its Tallin and Stockholm
offices, SEI has a long tradition of working on innovation in the Baltic Sea Region
8. World Maritime University (WMU) is the premier centre of excellence for the International Maritime Organization (IMO,
the specialized shipping agency of the United Nations). WMU conducts unique postgraduate education, research and
international capacity building for sustainability.
9. Swedish National Data Service (SND) has a primary function to support FAIR data (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable,
Reusable). SND leads a network of around 40 universities and public research institutes, forming a national infrastructure
for open access to research data.
10. Stockholm University (SU) provides C2B2 with competence in environmental law and policy.
11. IVL Swedish Environmental Research Institute provides C2B2 with competence in environmental law and first-hand
experience in national politics, governance and policy processes.
12. Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute (SMHI) is Sweden’s expert authority with the mission to forecast
changes in weather, water and climate, as well as the designated National Oceanographic Data Centre.
13. IHE Delft provides key competencies in co-creation methodologies using LivingLabs applied to diverse water and
environment challenges as well as relevant social science expertise for governance analysis, environmental policy and
impact assessment. IHE works under the auspices of UNESCO and forms part of the UN Water family.

13. IHE

12. SMHI

11. IVL

10. SU

9. SND

8. WMU

7. SEI

6. UMF

5. CIT

4. SIME

Lighthouse

3. Chalmers

2. RISE

C2B2 partner expertise

1. UGOT

Table 5 C2B2 expertise (per partner)

Scientific expertise (natural & social sciences)
Marine ecosystem science
Climate science
Ocean gov. & adaptive mgt
Environmental law
Social learning, social innov.
Value chains & land-sea connct.
Data & technology development
Data mgt & data stewardship
(Low-cost) sensor development
GEOSS, Copernicus, EOSC
Fusion of in-situ & satellite data
Decision & visualiz. systems
Offshore tech. & innovation
Stakeholder engagement & communication
Stakeholder engagement
LL & co-creation methodologies
Comms. & dissemination
Uptake of data in res. & policy
International networks & reach
Innovation management
Cascading funding, public procur.
For/non-profit business models

High attention has already been paid to gender balance and equality in the research team during the programme
proposal phase. Indeed, the composition of the key staff involved in the programme is gender-balanced (see Annex II –
CVs) and so it the lead of the four content-focused WPs: Mats Lindegarth (m) (WP1), Mikael Lind (m) (WP2), Andrea
Morf (f) (WP3) and Uta Wehn (f) (WP4). C2B2 will directly integrate a gender-focused approach in all its activities via
22

strong attention to gender balance in the recruitment of new personnel (PhD/researchers) and by promoting the
participation of female stakeholders in the Livinglabs. C2B2 will participate in the promotion of gender equality in R&D
in line with the EC Commission’s Gender Equality Strategy (2020-2025) and apply the methodological tools provided
by the most recent Gender Innovations Report (EC, 2022), resulting in a gender-equality plan to be produced by WP5
during the inception phase of the programme.
The programme will include industry and public sector organisations as associated partners. The public sector
organisations to be involved include SwAM, SMHI, Geological Survey of Sweden (SGU), municipalities, and County
Administrative Boards in the three LivingLab areas, Swedish Maritime Administration, and the National Grid (Svenska
kraftnät).
Industry actors include offshore installation companies Svea Vind Offshore, Liquid Wind, offshore companies Clinton
Marine Survey, Hitachi Energy, Fossil Free Marine, Inocean and Sea Twirl; shipping and boating companies Terntank,
Ecobarge, Marell Boats, Sensative, Vinga Konstruktion and Mooringo; large and small fisheries; and data companies
Combine, Maranics, LifeFinder, and Cetasol.
Civil society actors (e.g., environmental, local resident, end user and entrepreneurial organizations) for each LivingLab
will identified, advancing from the initial analysis during the proposal stage, and will be recruited during the inception
stage.
Together, these organisations will strengthen the sector expertise (shipping, fisheries, offshore) required to implement
the C2B2 programme activities and to ensure their sound embedding in the respective contexts of the case study areas.
Table 6 Already committed stakeholders (C2B2 associated partners)
Shipping (incl. leisure boating)

LL
North

LL
East

LL
West

Fisheries

Offshore installations

LifeFinder Syst. International AB
Sensative AB
Ecobarge Sweden AB,
Terntank AB,
Cetasol AB,
Sveavind Offshore AB
County Board Admin. Gävleborg
Swedish Maritime Administration

Sweden Pelagic Federation,
LifeFinder Syst. International AB
Ecobarge Sweden AB,
Cetasol AB,
Sveavind Offshore ABCombine AB
County Board Admin. Gävleborg
SwAM
Geological Survey of Sweden

Hitachi Energy AB
LifeFinder Syst. International AB
Ecobarge Sweden AB,
Clinton Marine Survey AB,
Cetasol AB,
Sveavind Offshore AB
County Board Admin. Gävleborg
Svenska kraftnät,
Geological Survey of Sweden

LifeFinder Syst. International AB
Sensative AB
Fossil Free Marine Europe AB,
Ecobarge Sweden AB,
Marell Boats AB,
Terntank AB
Cetasol AB,
Sveavind Offshore AB
County Board Admin. Gotland,
Region Stockholm,
Swedish Maritime Administration

Sweden Pelagic Federation,
LifeFinder Syst. International AB
Ecobarge Sweden AB,
Cetasol AB,
Sveavind Offshore AB
Combine AB
County Board Admin. Gotland,
Gotland municipality,
Blue Center Gotland,
Region Stockholm,
SwAM
Geological Survey of Sweden

LifeFinder Syst. International AB
Sensative AB
Ecobarge Sweden AB,
Terntank AB,
Cetasol AB,
Vinga Konstr. AB Bottenlusen,
Mooringo AB
City of Gothenburg
Region of Västra Götaland,
Swedish Maritime Administration

Sweden Pelagic Federation,
Ecobarge Sweden AB,
Cetasol AB,
LifeFinder Syst. International AB
Combine AB
City of Gothenburg
Region of Västra Götaland,
Fiskekommunerna
Boarder Committee of Svinesund
8-Fjords
SwAM
Geological Survey of Sweden

Hitachi Energy AB
SeaTwirl AB,
LifeFinder Syst. International AB
Fossil Free Marine Europe AB,
Clinton Marine Survey AB,
Windeed AB,
Cetasol AB,
Sveavind Offshore AB
County Board Admin. Gotland,
Gotland municipality,
Blue Center Gotland,
Region Stockholm,
Svenska kraftnät
Geological Survey of Sweden
Hitachi Energy AB
SeaTwirl AB,
LifeFinder Syst. International AB
Clinton Marine Survey AB,
Cetasol AB,
Zephyr Renewble AB
Inocean AB
City of Gothenburg
Region of Västra Götaland,
Svenska kraftnät
Geological Survey of Sweden

Note: Separated per LivingLab area and the three blue economy sector interests (shipping, fisheries, offshore installations). Shipping
also includes leisure boating. Several organisations are interested in more than one LivingLab and/or more than one sector. Public
sector organisations are indicated with italics.

The C2B2 programme activities will benefit from the strong institutional relationships, networks and initiatives of
the C2B2 programme partners and associated programme partners, which include tight links with ongoing and newly
23

funded EU projects (e.g. ILIAD – Digital Twin of the Ocean, ASTRIIS Digital Twin), the Ocean Knowledge Action
Network, the Helsinki Committee (HELCOM) Marine Spatial Planning Working Group and existing networks (e.g.
Innovation Platform for Sustainable Sea & Ocean Solutions (ISSS), the International Council for Exploration of the
Seas (ICES), the Oslo and Paris Convention (OSPAR Commission) and activities related to UN Decade of Ecosystem
Restoration and the UN Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development. Moreover, three C2B2 partners (SEI,
WMU, IHE) have a strong international orientation and networks, with WMU and IHE formally linked into the United
Nations system (IMO and UNESCO, respectively).

6. Description of work packages, including deliverables
The C2B2 programme will be implemented via five interlinked WPs, aimed at triggering a robust, inclusive and just
transition towards participatory ocean governance. The work structure includes three WPs that consolidate and advance
the three pillars of an evolving knowledge system for participatory ocean governance: science (WP1), technology &
innovation (WP2) and governance practices (WP3). WP4 is the demonstration of co-creating participatory ocean
governance in LivingLabs in the three C2B2 case study areas in Sweden, based on and in close interaction with WPs 13. The programme management and communication in WP5 will ensure the smooth progress of all C2B2 activities and
the wide communication, dissemination and exploitation of the programme results.

Figure 5 C2B2 WP structure

WP1 Open ecosystem and climate science (Lead: UGOT) -M1-48
Objectives: The purpose of WP1 is to gather key data and scientific knowledge including their gaps and help advance
scientific knowledge about ecosystems, biodiversity loss and climate change impact in Swedish offshore areas. This
will be done by using new and relevant data on the benthic and pelagic biodiversity and environmental characteristics,
as well as existing and planned societal activities and pressures. The focus is on “interconnectors”: e.g., across functional
parts of ecosystems, across different areas and environmental domains, and the interplay between socio-economic
activities and the marine environment, including out at sea and on land. The specific objectives are:
• To synthesise current (gaps in) knowledge about health, resilience and vulnerability of the ecosystems, as well
as biodiversity and the effects of climate change.
• To provide integrated and adaptive change assessments, projections, and simulations of the ecosystems, both
by means of simplified analytical tools and by numerical tools and modelling.
• To integrate new data sources into the scientific knowledge system that are being advanced by WP2 and tested
in the LivingLabs (WP4)
T1.1 Synthesise ecosystem and climate science and knowledge gaps M1-48 (Lead: SIME; participants: UGOT,
UMF, SMHI)
This task will initially and continuously present the best available data, information, and knowledge of the ecosystems
and the climate in the three case study areas. This includes producing integrated assessments, readily accessible to nonnatural scientists, incl. various stakeholders in the LivingLabs in WP4. These will be data rich and regularly updated as
well as openly available online and actively promoted. Furthermore, the task will identify uncertainties and the most
24

important knowledge and data gaps of the ecosystem and climate science. This will be done by querying the science
community and the literature, and by participating in the co-creation process in the LivingLabs. A small international
workshop with experts will be convened in M6, by invitation only, to produce a widely accepted list facts, uncertainties,
and most urgent knowledge gaps. The focus will be on identifying biodiversity components of central importance to
ecosystem functions and services. In particular, we will look at impacts of biodiversity loss and climate change on the
resilience of ecosystems. The extensively investigated effects from fisheries and shipping will be reviewed and
summarized, while the effects from the rapidly expanding offshore installations are covered in a separate task (T1.3).
T1.2 Tools & models for assessments and simulations M1-24 (Lead: UGOT; participants: SIME, UMF, Chalmers,
SND, SMHI)
In order to feed relevant scientific knowledge into the discussions in the LivingLabs, this task will present a set of tools
for assessments and simulations of the ecosystems and climate of the case study areas. The tools will be suitable for
various types of quantifications of developments and impacts. The tools will have different levels of complexity,
representing a balance of ease-of-use and detailed presentations of results. The toolbox will include the following:
- The widely used GIS based tool Symphony, developed by SwAM for ecosystem-based marine spatial planning.
Symphony is used to quantitatively weigh ecosystems and environmental pressures. With Symphony, the cumulative
environmental impact from different MSP options can be objectively and systematically compared.
- A limited area 3D circulation model, based on open access and well documented code, e.g. a scaled down version
UGOT’s KASK model (Christensen et al., 2018) covering Kattegatt-Skagerrak. Such models have physical parameters
as the base, to which depending biological and chemical processes and parameters can be coupled. This can for example
be used to assess the effect on the ecosystem by an offshore wind farm (Broström, 2008).
- A coupled socio-ecological model based on UGOT’s Koster Sea model (Retting et al., under review). Such models
represent the frontline in decision support tools. They deliver uniquely integrated results which are very useful in
governance. Empirical data together with expert knowledge and evidence from the literature will be integrated into a
Bayesian Belief Network.
- The interactive IPCC WGI AR6 Atlas for assessing regional and global climate information. The atlas is the most
accessible method for using the results from WG1 (with C2B2 team member Prof. Chen as lead author) of the IPCC’s
most recent assessment (Chen et al., 2021; IPCC 2021).
These tools/models will be set up and used to deliver outputs in a relatively fast mode, which will be an important
requirement to support the co-creation process in the LivingLabs. Some of these tools/models require training to set up
and use, others can be used by experts only. Therefore, this task will also strengthen the capacity of relevant LivingLab
participants (e.g. local/regional authorities) to use selected tools.
T1.3 Land-sea interactions in the offshore blue economy M1-36 (Lead: CIT; participants: SEI, SIME, UMF)
This task will explore relevant land-sea interactions of the offshore blue economy in the LivingLabs. Activities offshore
are strongly conditioned by characteristics of the coast and its usage, related infrastructure and flows, and the growing
competition for space and access to coastal areas is also affecting the offshore space (Kidd et al., 2019; Morf et al.,
2022). For example, recreation and real estate development compete with infrastructure, supply and maintenance needs
for industry. Moreover, while economic values may originate offshore in terms of, e.g., biomass or energy extraction,
the value chain continues onshore, where the larger part of the economic and societal value may be created. This task
will therefore, in coordination with WP3 and the LivingLabs in WP4, investigate relevant connections generated
between the onshore and offshore in terms of interactions and values, and the balance between onshore and offshore.
This will be done by mapping key interactions and value chains (e.g. generated value, job opportunities) relevant for the
cases, in total 1-3 chains. Sources and methods will include scientific and grey literature, spatial data, statistics,
interviews with key informants, which will be processed through document analysis, flow and interaction chain analyses,
spatial & actor analysis. This task will deliver a description of relevant interactions and value chains to be used and
complemented in the LivingLabs and from a governance perspective in Task 3.2 and Task 3.3.
T1.4 Quantifying effects of offshore installations on biodiversity M1-48 (Lead: UGOT; participants: Chalmers, CIT)
Ship-based human activities (fisheries and transport) have been part of the offshore blue economy for centuries and
more. Currently we are in period of fundamental change, with the rapid expansion of permanent offshore installations,
today mostly represented by offshore wind farms. What this will mean for the marine environment, for the blue (and
wider) economy, and indeed for humankind’s relation to the ocean, remains to be investigated. Existing knowledge of
the environmental effects from offshore wind farms can only been considered as preliminary and limited. A recent report
from SEPA (Bergström et al., 2021) raises both issues of concerns and some cautious optimism. This task will use
existing and novel data sources (incl. from T2.2), as well as numerical tools and models (in collaboration with T1.4) to
quantify the effect on biodiversity from permanent offshore installations, and especially wind farms. This includes local
impacts in the vicinity of individual installations as well as larger-scale impacts related to differences in management
regimes between wind-parks and areas designated to conservation or other types of use. Benthic and pelagic biodiversity
25

will be quantified using data types including traditional monitoring techniques as well as eDNA and video images. The
data analysis will include machine learning algorithms developed by the Ocean Data Factory Sweden partners. Effects
will be quantified and assessed from a perspective of the whole expected lifecycle of the installations, from explorationconstruction to decommissioning. Preliminary results will be produced during the C2B2 programme period, based on
data from already commissioned installations. The task will establish methods and protocols (incl. for data streams) for
biodiversity quantifications around offshore installations, incl. baselines in areas of planned explorations.
WP1 Deliverables
▪ Synthesis of the offshore ecosystems in the C2B2 case study areas (SIME, M7, M24)
▪ Toolbox with numerical tools & models for ecosystem & climate assessments and simulations (UGOT, M8, M24)
▪ Scientific publication on climate change impacts and resilience in Swedish waters (UGOT, M36)
▪ Scientific publication on land-sea interactions in the offshore blue economy (CIT, M36)
▪ Scientific publication on the effect on biodiversity from offshore installations (UGOT, M48)
▪ PhD graduate + 4 scientific publications on integrated and adaptive change assessments, forecasts, and simulations
of marine ecosystems (UGOT)

WP2 Open, data-driven innovation & emerging technologies (Lead: RISE) M1-48
Objectives: WP2 will help re-imagine blue economy sectors - that have traditionally operated to deliver specific
services – as platforms for hosting multiple activities. WP 2 does this by enabling data-driven innovation and technology
development based on offshore presence of energy harvest, fisheries and shipping. The specific objectives are:

•
•
•
•

To provide benchmarks for open by design, multifunctional system solutions
To engage commercial and non-commercial actors within the blue economy sectors in multifunctional solutions
and new data collection platforms during the open innovation process within and beyond the LivingLabs
To generate and foster innovative approaches related to the potential of new, open by design approaches to data
collection and knowledge co-creation via an Open Call for Solutions (public procurement)
To coordinate, integrate and soundly manage data via marine data stewardship

T2.1 Open and multi-functional offshore installations by design – SoA M1-36 (Lead: SEI; participants: RISE,
CIT, IHE, UGOT, SIME, Chalmers
We explore how three system characteristics could increase effectiveness in the delivery of marine services. First,
drawing on global examples and dialogue with key agencies (e.g., SMHI, SMA, SGU) we investigate whether and how
multifunctional use can turn offshore installations (permanent, floating, grided, off-grid) and vessels into sensor
platforms for ocean monitoring and seabed mapping. Second, we qualitatively and quantitatively analyze the extent to
which modularity – the construction of systems through independent components – can reduce investment risks, capital
and operational costs (CAPEX and OPEX). Third, we look for evidence to assess whether and how semi-permanent,
mobile, floating structures could reduce environmental impacts and increase system redundancy and flexibility
particularly related to critical service provision like water or energy (Xylia et al., forthcoming). This work draws on a
combination of systematic reviews of white and grey literature globally and primary data collection derived from the
discussion and reporting in the LivingLabs to understand the conditions that can enable this type of solutions and outline
potential risks. We carry out assessments of costs and an overview of benefits for a selected number of solutions. We
look into business models and financing mechanisms for deployment and upscaling. The results of this task will
contribute to establishing benchmarks for comparing emerging multifunctional marine solutions, and they will inform
distinct sessions during the co-creation process in the Living Labs (WP4), engaging multiple stakeholders in reimagining
offshore infrastructures.
T2.2 Requirements for open data collection M1-48 (Lead: RISE; participants: Chalmers, UGOT, IHE, CIT, SMHI,
SND)
In order to enable an open innovation climate in C2B2, this task will start off by developing an Innovation Management
Plan for the programme and its participants (including associated partners and procured developers/SMEs) in month 6.
This will contain programme policy on Open Innovation and IPR as well as a strategy for establishing partnerships with
relevant Open Innovation platforms internationally (the Sargasso Maritime Open Innovation platform does presently
only have a Scandinavian reach). It will also contain suitable programme specific Innovation KPI’s which RISE will
use to monitor innovations in the programme and their optimal management, incl. based on partners’ IPR analyses.
At its core, this task will explore the potential of new, open by design approaches to data collection, in combination with
existing data streams and knowledge co-creation on ocean ecosystem parameters, atmospheric parameters incl. air
pollution and GHG-emissions, as well as economic and human activities, and other relevant indicators. Building on the
requirements from the scientific community extracted by WP1 and the stakeholder demands from the user-centred cocreation process in the LivingLabs (WP4), this task will create an overview of scientific and case-specific data and
knowledge gaps. Requirements will be registered in a requirements management tool and ordered in terms of priority.
26

Also, the existing technological set up in each LivingLab will be mapped (e.g., data models, system architecture,
decision support systems, data sources and data flows). The requirements will inform the search for existing data
sources, solutions or relevant advances among the C2B2 partners (Chalmers, RISE). Searches will be done via various
channels and platforms (e.g. SARGASSO, existing needs & solutions hubs) and identifying whether existing Earth
Observation and emerging sensors and technologies, being developed in Sweden or internationally, can address these
gaps. Also, the increasing number of past and present marine citizen science projects may constitute relevant
additional/complementary data sources. These will be identified from the elaborate inventory of marine citizen science
developed by UGOT which to date contains >730 projects. Unmatched needs will be clustered, if appropriate, and,
formulated into concrete specifications for the Open Call for Solutions in T2.3.
T2.3 Innovation in open data collection platforms for knowledge co-creation M6-48 (Lead: Chalmers; participants:
RISE, UGOT, IHE, CIT, SMHI, SND
Based on the consolidated requirements and specifications produced by task T2.2, this task will deliver technological
development and advances of open data collection platforms in two distinct ways.
A) Lead Chalmers: C2B2 partners Chalmers and Rise will advance relevant existing activities in emerging
technologies (AI, machine learning, and autonomous drones; integration of new data sources into existing
decision support systems), including via a PhD student. The specific focus will be on deploy-and-forget systems,
with no (or low) demands of attention during operations. This requires both carefully balanced performance and
a very strong robustness, not only in terms of physical integrity and safety (including autonomous navigation
for moving robots), but also for automated energy management, fault detection, data communication and cyber
security.
B) Lead: UGOT: The remaining specifications from T2.2 will be used for an Open Call for solutions (public
procurement) from SMEs, start ups and industry actors, using the extensive experience of various partners
(UGOT, RISE, IHE). The Open Call will be disseminated strategically via various channels, especially
Sargasso. Sargasso is the Maritime Open Innovation Platform hosted by the Swedish Maritime Technology
Forum which connects business cluster member organisations from both the maritime domain and other sectors.
Sargasso enables intersectoral innovation for maritime related opportunities and challenges. This cascading
funding will be financed from the secured C2B2 cash co-funding of 4MSEK. All procurement will be
supported administratively by UGOT’s procurement office.
The resulting prototypes (by the C2B2 partners and those procured) will be fed into the activities of WP1 and those of
the LivingLabs in WP4 and iteratively adapted, based on user feedback collected via the co-design methodology of
T4.1. The integration of new data streams into major existing data environments will be done in T2.5. Also, the solution
providers will have the opportunity to test, demonstrate and exploit their prototypes and solutions via the C2B2 open
innovation events in T2.4 and they will be promoted via the C2B2 dissemination activities in T5.4.
T2.4 Open Innovation events for technology development and data exploitation M8-48 (Lead: RISE; participants:
UGOT, IHE, CIT, SMHI, SND, Chalmers
In order to engage technology developers, solution providers as well as blue economy sectors in new data collection
platforms during the innovation process within and beyond the LivingLabs, this task will run 10 open innovation events
(three different types of events).
Hackathons (RISE): Three hackathons will be used to create sensors, tools, and systems for the collection, processing
and visualisation of data collected via multifunctional platforms and fused with other (in-situ and EO) data, in response
to the needs identified in WP1 and in the LLs. These events will have technology developers, scientists and data
aggregators (public and commercial) interacting at early stages of the innovation process, incl. with potential
competitors, at a technical level. This will help promote standardization through the identification of common technical
requirements as well as interoperability between (legacy and current) data collection, processing and visualisation
technologies. The hackathons will be held in M24, M30 and M36.
Two Open Data Exploitation Challenges (lead: RISE) will be held (M32 and M42) to encourage the uptake of the
new data streams and technologies amongst the SME community and provide exploitation opportunities. Building on
the Data Bakery methodology of the Ocean Data Factory Sweden, a 48 hour kick-off event will allow matchmaking
between developers and people ‘owning’ specific challenges, followed by a period of development.
Offshore test days (lead: UGOT) using UGOT’s research
vessel Skagerak. These events will allow technology
developers and entrepreneurs to test the multifunctionality of
their sensors, platforms, robots and other hardware in any
Swedish offshore water, and beyond. Successful new data
streams will feature in the Open Data Exploitation Challenge.
The test days will be a yearly C2B2 event (5 in total), supported
27

by Swedish Centre for Ocean Observing Technology and by technical staff and scientific marine experts from UGOT,
RISE and Chalmers.
Where possible, these events will be integrated with existing conferences, LivingLabs meetings, GEO meetings and
other relevant events that take place during the lifetime of the C2B2 programme to open up participation to as wide an
audience as possible. We aim to engage a minimum of 30 participants in each event. The dual reporting about these
open innovation events will generate insights for recommendations on open innovation that will feed into a policy brief
in WP5 for planning agencies, innovators, and financers.
T2.5 Marine data stewardship – FAIR & Open data management and integration into existing aggregators M148 (Lead: SND; participants: RISE, UGOT, Chalmers, SMHI, IHE)
The generation of new data sources about the ocean and their combination with existing data is accelerating the need to
coordinate, integrate and soundly manage such data using the FAIR data principles. Yet many research institutions
and/or groups collecting marine data are too small to afford a Data Steward. All Swedish universities can obtain advice
on data management from SND, but subject-specific support to ensure the availability of marine data is not yet available
and there is no direct support yet with file management, which in many cases is needed to maximize data utilization.
Data stewardship is also recognized by SIME as critical for effective environmental monitoring (Emmerson et al., 2018)
This task will keep track of and provide direct support to C2B2 and other projects that collect marine research data. This
will ensure that new data streams (incl. those created in T2.2) will be integrated into major existing data environments
(major data aggregators such as Copernicus, the European Open Science Cloud (EOSC) and widely used sector specific
systems) in order to maximize their uptake and utilisation.
We will do so by creating an inventory to keep track of past, running and new projects that collect marine data (e.g.
checking new grants from Swedish and European research funders; web pages and social media for project
announcements; and direct contact with researchers in marine institutions). The PIs of those projects will be contacted
early on to find out what data is being collected, and to inform them, if needed, on open data and requirements from the
funder, whether the infrastructure used has an open data policy, relevant legislative frameworks. For example, the Open
Access Infrastructure for Research in Europe (www.OpenAire.eu / www.Zenodo.org) can be used for data sets that can
be freely shared. This requires researchers to be made aware of EOSC/Zenodo, the FAIR Guiding Principles and to
actively ensure use http://www.openaire.eu/http://www.zenodo.org/(legally and technically sound) of their data for
others to be able to validate their conclusions. Crucially, the PIs will be advised about the large possible benefits to their
research by making their data openly available and widely used.
C2B2 will announce and communicate that the programme can be contacted by researchers both during the application
process to help them with their data management plan, and during the project lifetime to help them publish their data
using the FAIR data principles. The guidance materials, project inventory and lessons learned generated by this task
will feed into the efforts to build a national coordination framework for marine research data led by SMHI and SND,
funded by Formas.
WP2 Deliverables
▪ Open inventory (database) of marine data collection projects (SND) M3, M48
▪ Prototype innovations in data collection platforms for informing governance of a sustainable blue economy (RISE)
M24, M48
▪ Scientific publication on opportunities and risks of Marine, Multifunctional, Modular, Mobile solutions (SEI) M36
▪ Scientific publication on advances in ocean data collection platforms (Chalmers) (M40)
▪ PhD graduate + 4 scientific publications on new data collection platform for an expanding sustainable blue economy
(Chalmers)

WP3 Ocean governance and adaptive management (Lead: SIME) M1-48
Objectives: The purpose of WP3 is to implement the C2B2 top down approach by exploring how the ocean governance
can ensure viable marine ecosystems in view of expanding offshore industries, by reimagining ocean governance,
moving from single-use, single-sector practices towards truly integrative, multifunctional ecosystem-based governance.
The specific objectives are:
• To analyse the current state-of-affairs in ocean governance at multiple levels
• To identify crucial international marine spatial planning out-of-the-box tools
• To co-create transition scenarios for a better blue that are adapted to the Swedish context
• To generate recommendations for the future governance of the blue economy in a changing climate.
T3.1 Assessing preparedness of Sweden’s ocean governance to climate and earth system change M1-46 (Lead:
SIME; participants: SEI, SU, UGOT, WMU, IVL, IHE)
This task assesses the preparedness of Sweden’s current ocean governance to address both, accelerated climate and
wider earth system change, and increasing and competing demands from multiple and emerging blue sectors. The
28

analysis will cover two policy levels: i) whether and how international commitments are implemented into national
actions; ii) whether and how national action trickles down to regional and local level implementation. We analyse five
lenses of ocean governance: architecture and agency, democracy and power, justice and allocation, anticipation and
imagination, and adaptiveness and reflexivity (Burch et al., 2019) by reviewing academic literature, analysing key
policies documents, interviews and focus group discussions with key stakeholders across the three cases. The analysis
will cover policies, regulations, strategies and resources created or (re)directed to operationalize commitments, and the
actors and networks with influence in the system. For the local level, relevant management practices and concerns will
emerge from the co-creation processes in the LivingLabs (WP4). This will provide an overview of discourse and
commitments in relation to actual implementation, helping to identify progress, gaps and level of preparedness of
Sweden’s ocean governance to systemic changes. Results will feed into the discussions in the LivingLabs (WP4) and
the other WP3 tasks.
T3.2 Exploring the governance and legal framework for multifunctional ocean governance M1-36 (Lead: SU;
participants: SIME, SEI, IVL, WMU, CIT)
Multifunctionality has been proposed as a possible strategy to overcome competing claims at sea through the
combination of economic, conservation, and monitoring activities. But multifunctionality requires conducive
regulations, procedures and incentives. Currently these do not exist or hamper the deployment of multifunctional
solutions. Legal obstacles include conflicting goals, regulatory gaps, jurisdictional overlaps and the lack of a clearly
defined social and ecological balance between goals. Other possible obstacles include lack of awareness, contacts,
forums, procedures, knowledge, mandates, practice or capacity. Relevant obstacles and enablers need to be identified
and addressed to develop a more efficient governance framework and processes that can e.g. facilitate private-public or
cross-sector cooperation. This task first explores how multifunctionality – through co-use, co-location and coexistence
– can be made compatible with an ecosystem approach (Barquet & Green 2022; Przedrzymirska et al., 2021). We
identify what legislation, policies, processes and institutional characterists promote or obstruct multifunctional ocean
governance and also map the relevant actors and their mandates, forums and networks. While taking a systems
perspective, the main thematic and geographical focus will be shaped by the LivingLabs. One starting point to address
the complexity of the legal framework will be the Marine Strategy Framework Directive, another will depart from spatial
planning and integrated management. As necessary, and in coordination with T1.3 and the cases, the analyses of this
task will include land-sea interaction aspects of specific uses. Key sources and methods will include scientific and grey
literature, regulatory and policy documents, interviews and workshops with key informants, to be analysed and
synthesized using standard legal and policy analysis methods. The results from this task will outline the potential and
current obstacles to more multifunctional interventions in marine areas, will contribute to Task 3.3 co-creating scenarios
for transitioning towards a sustainable blue economy in and will inform recommendations for promoting
multifunctionality to be captured in one of the policy briefs in WP5.
T3.3 Scenarios for transitioning towards a multifunctional and sustainable blue economy M1-40 (Lead: SEI;
participants: SIME, WMU, SU, IHE, CIT)
Using transition management as analytical starting point (Loorbach 2010), this task will explore through a scenario
approach the policy changes that could lead to possible incremental changes – shallow adjustments that within the
current state of affairs could lead to beneficial outcomes for marine ecosystems, society, biodiversity and climate – and
which ones could lead to radical or deep change – often requiring restructuring. A set of qualitative exploratory scenarios
will be constructed using inputs from Tasks 3.1, 3.2 and from WP1 and WP2, along with socioeconomic and
environmental drivers/factors. Each scenario will describe a distinct alternative future. For identifying the most
important and relevant drivers and further constructing the narratives of future scenarios, we will consult key
stakeholders, including marine and coastal planning experts on national, regional and local levels. Stakeholders will also
be invited to discuss the results and ways to address them in a Swedish context. Insights and results will be transferred
to task T3.5.
T3.4 International comparative marine policy M1-48 (Lead: WMU; participants: IHE, SIME, IVL, SEI, UGOT,
SU)
The main objective of this task is to identify crucial international marine spatial planning out-of-the-box tools derived
from policy-standards in order to tailor those to fit the Swedish context for strengthening integrated ecosystem
management. In close collaboration with T5.5 (International cooperation and liaison), this task will be aligned with
contemporary state-of-the-art international initiatives under the UN Decade of Ecosystem Restoration and the Decade
of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development. Parallel to this, we integrate best practices and lessons learned from a
selected member states of the International Maritime Organization (e.g., Belgium, Germany, Denmark) that could serve
as a reference and even standards for other coastal states. Methods include literature reviews and document analyses to
i) assess strengths-weaknesses-opportunities-challenges of Swedish marine spatial planning; ii) examine international
best practices from selected states through a structured on-line survey and semi-structured expert interviews; iii) appraise
29

the findings from the international comparative analysis to co-create tools/components for integrated ecosystem and
blue economy planning in Sweden.
T3.5 Governance recommendations: reimagining ocean governance M42-48 (Lead: SIME: participants: SEI, SU,
WMU, IHE, IVL, UGOT, CIT)
Synthesising the results from WP3, this task will reflect on the outputs of T3.1-T3.4 against relevant literature and other
areas of expertise. Gaps for future research will also be identified. For a wider planning and management audience, it
will distil recommendations and governance lessons on transitioning to participatory ocean governance and sustainable
blue economy in a changing climate, resulting in different, targeted products.
WP3 Deliverables
▪
▪
▪
▪
▪

Synthesis of the state of the art in ocean governance in the C2B2 case studies (SIME, M12)
Synthesis of legal framework for multifunctional marine spatial planning (SU, M36)
Scientific publication on transition scenarios for a sustainable blue economy in Sweden (SEI, M36)
Scientific publication on international comparative marine policy: lessons learned for Sweden (WMU, M46)
Scientific publication on addressing systemic change and multifunctionality in marine planning and management
(C2B2 top-down approach) (SIME, M46)
▪ Debate article on governance opportunities and gaps for a multifunctional and sustainable blue economy in
Sweden (SIME, M44)
▪ PhD graduate + 4 scientific publications in blue economy and ocean governance (WMU)

WP4 Co-creation of participatory ocean governance in LivingLabs (Lead: IHE) M1-48
Objectives: The overall purpose of WP4 is to provide the basis for setting up and implementing the LivingLabs in the
three case studies and to derive insights and recommendations for replicating this approach. Specific objectives are:
• To generate concise and coherent guidance for setting up LivingLabs for co-creating participatory ocean
governance
• To ensure all approaches are based on tested concepts and methods and integrate principles of gender equality
and inclusiveness in the stakeholder participation activities
• To mentor the LivingLab teams in applying co-creation tools and approaches relevant for the context and
priorities of their LivingLabs
• To advance the scientific understanding of social learning as a key mechanism for transition and the uptake of
new data streams in science, technology and governance
• To foster collaboration, peer learning and knowledge sharing among the teams and participants in the
LivingLabs and with other LivingLabs and external reference case studies
• To strengthen the capacity of local actors to increase ownership over the co-creation process, embed it in formal
decision making and ensure sustainability of the C2B2 program results.
T4.1 Methodology for co-creating participatory ocean governance in LivingsLabs and implementation
guidance/mentoring (incl. gender and inclusive solutions) M1-48 (Lead: IHE; participants: SEI, SIME)
The task will provide an approach for establishing and running the LivingLab in each case study. It will create process
guidance for the expert teams that support the LivingLabs throughout the implementation stage (T4.2-T4.4) consisting
of a generic compendium as well as tailored coaching. The co-creation process in each LL will be preceded by a rapid
screening and stakeholder analysis (link with T3.1) to identify, per case, which stakeholders should be involved and
existing conditions. The co-creation in each LL will be planned, tailored and implemented by a dedicated team of C2B2
partners per case (T4.2-4.4), guided by IHE.
Carefully designed workshops will engage relevant key stakeholders in the context and challenge of each case and in
the identification of required data, knowledge, decisions and actions. In this co-creation process, it is key to integrate
expertise, knowledge and insights from the three thematic pillars of ecosystems-based ocean governance, also including
stakeholders’ knowledge, needs and preferences. Also, iterations and validation points during the co-creation process
will ensure that co-created plans are realistic, accepted, and legal, and avoided designs dominated by one stakeholder
group, or based on assumptions of one group about the motivations of another. Moreover, workshops are designed to
create spaces for social learning among participants.
The expertise to conduct the co-creation activities will be shared by IHE with key programme partners who have
complementary hands-on facilitation expertise. Advanced knowledge management routines will ensure consistency of
the C2B2 co-creation approach via detailed guidance and feedback mechanisms, while supporting tailoring of
interaction methods to case-specific contexts, culture, and other particularities.
The mentoring of the LL expert teams will include F2F guidance as well as regular, frequent online meetings, incl.
guidance on how to recruit, interact with and maintain interest of key stakeholders of each LL. The outputs of each LL
interaction session will be analysed (in collaboration with T1.2, T2.2 and T3.2) and synthesized resulting in agreed
30

challenges, requirements, changes and objectives (reported in each case’s compendium). The task will also contribute
to the quality assurance of the programme by implementing ethics procedures and facilitating structured RRI-related
discussions (incl. inclusiveness, justice and gender equality) as part of the LivingLabs planning and design processes.
This will ensure that all innovative products, services and activities embody RRI (Responsible Research & Innovation)
principles and actively support the deconstruction of implicit biases and structural inequality.
T4.2 LivingLab North (Lead: UMF; participants: IHE, SIME, UGOT, CIT)
This task will establish and run the LivingLab in the case study North. This will be done under the guidance of T4.1 and
with a dedicated team of C2B2 partners. The details of this case study are presented in section 2.3.
T4.3 LivingLab East (Lead: SEI; participants: IHE, SIME, UGOT, CIT, WMU, Chalmers)
This task will establish and run the LivingLab in the case study East. This will be done under the guidance of T4.1 and
with a dedicated team of C2B2 partners. The details of this case study are presented in section 2.3.
T4.4 LivingLab West (Lead: CIT; participants: IHE, SIME, UGOT, Chalmers)
This task will establish and run the LivingLab in the case study West. This will be done under the guidance of T4.1 and
with a dedicated team of C2B2 partners. The details of this case study are presented in section 2.3.
T4.5 Peer learning and capacity building (Lead: IHE; participants: all partners)
The task will facilitate the regular knowledge exchange between different groups to ensure continuous learning and
adaptive decision-making during the implementation stage in each LL and the consolidation of insights and lessons
learned in the finalisation stage of the programme. Specifically, peer learning will be facilitated at three levels: 1) among
the LivingLabs teams, 2) among participants across the three LivingLabs (quadruple helix stakeholders incl. programme
partners and associated programme partners), and 3) with external reference case studies (such as EBMM Pilot
Stockholm Archipelago; EBMM Pilot Southern Bothnian Sea; Fisheries co-management 8-Fjords project). We will
carefully structure the interactions for each of these distinct groups to facilitate meaningful dialogue and reflection
depending on the constellation of participants. Moreover, based on the results of a structured capacity needs analysis in
stage 3 (Sustainability) of the program, joint tailored trainings will be held to strengthen the capacity of (local) actors in
all LivingLabs as well as key actors identified in WP3, ensuring sustainability of the implemented technologies, data
and knowledge flows and participatory procedures.
T4.6 Evaluation and impact assessment (Lead: IHE; participants: SEI, SIME, CIT, UMF)
Building on existing expertise and proven assessments, the task will tailor and implement the methodology for the
integrated and participatory Monitoring, Evaluation & Learning process of the project activities in the three LivingLabs
and of the project impacts at large. It will measure and monitor progress towards achieving the C2B2 aims (see section
1) according to identified indicators and outputs and using a range of information sources (e.g. LivingLab compendia
and workshop logbooks, project reports, structured interviews with key stakeholders in each LivingLab). It will validate
the viability of co-creating evidence-based participatory ocean governance in the three LivingLabs, against both the
requirements of various local stakeholders and the broader objectives of the Mistra blue economy call. To assess the
impacts of the co-created ocean governance in the LivingLabs, state-of-the art impact assessment methods, incl. coevaluation with participants, will be used and assess the extent to which the social innovation processes in the
LivingLabs have resulted in social learning (Wehn et al., 2018). The results of this task, incl. the elaboration of specific
success stories, will regularly feed into the communication and dissemination activities of T5.2.
WP4 Deliverables
▪ Prototype LivingLabs methodology and initial guidance with generic case compendium (IHE, M3)
▪ Scientific publication on the transition towards participatory governance in the LivingLab North in the context of
pronounced climate change impacts (UMF, M28)
▪ Scientific publication on the transition towards participatory governance in the LivingLab East in the context of
heightened security tensions (SEI, M30)
▪ Scientific publication on the transition towards participatory governance in the LivingLab West - managing the
expanding blue economy while sustaining high biodiversity (CIT, M32)
▪ Debate article from the LivingLab North for public discussion (UMF, M28)
▪ Debate article from the LivingLab East for public discussion (SEI, M30)
▪ Debate article from the LivingLab West for public discussion (CIT, M32)
▪ Scientific publication on the transition towards participatory governance and a sustainable blue economy in Sweden
using LivingLabs (C2B2 bottom up approach) (IHE, M44)

31

WP5 Programme Management and Communication (Lead: UGOT) M1-48
Objectives: This WP will ensure the effective and timely achievement of the programme goals in the most cost-efficient
manner. The specific objectives are:
• To guarantee a smooth flow of information and efficient decisions-making processes within the consortium;
• To ensure the timely execution of the activities according to the original plan;
• To monitor progress of the planned activity and anticipate as much as possible potential shortfalls;
• To coordinate the financial management of the project by controlling expenditures;
• To report to and communicate with Mistra;
• To ensure regular and effective Project Management Team meetings and timely interactions with the
Programme Board
T5.1 Programme coordination and reporting (Lead: UGOT; participants: RISE, SIME, IHE, CIT, SEI, UMF)
This task will deliver the overall programme planning and consortium coordination and ensure administrative,
contractual and financial project management as well as obtain a good dialogue with Mistra and the Advisory Board.
Within this task, the Programme Director will make sure that activities performed by each consortium member are
properly executed. The Programme Director will ensure proper and timely information related to each Work Package is
provided and consolidated into high-quality reports. Advice and inputs of the Mistra project officer will be taken into
consideration and work plans and budgets adjusted if mutually agreed. Specific project coordination tasks implemented
include: i) managing project progress and responding to important changes; ii) controlling manpower resources with
running costs, risk analysis; iii) timely submission of reports, deliverables, cost statements, financial certificates etc. to
Mistra; iv) financial and legal administration (e.g. transfer of Mistra payments to the partners, maintenance of
consortium agreement); v) distribution of documents/ information among the consortium; and vi) external representation
of the project. This task will also coordinate the interactions with the Advisory Board and relay their recommendations
to the consortium. Annual progress reports will summarise progress against the work plan and meetings of the
consortium and with the Programme Board.
T5.2 Quality assurance, risk management and data management plan (Lead: UGOT: participants: RISE, SIME,
IHE, CIT, SEI, UMF)
A Quality Assurance Plan will be prepared to include QA procedures to be applied to all internal and external activities,
services and deliverables. The goal is to ensure the detection of errors and deviations as early as possible, to enable the
consortium to apply corrective actions or contingency plans. This includes the production and implementation of the
gender-equality plan; it will form part of the Programme Handbook that will serve to guide programme activities and
ensure consistency throughout the programme life time, especially in view of potential programme staff turnover at any
of the C2B2 partners. A risk management plan will be prepared at the very beginning of the programme and then updated
continuously. The task will monitor risks initially identified, report to the programme management group on the status
of such risks and seek actions from the management group as a result of any changed circumstances associated with a
specific risk. Actions identified in such instances will be recorded in the risk management register. The Programme
Director will keep track of any changes and unforeseen issues affecting the planning of the project in a Change
Management Register and will communicate these, as appropriate, to the respective WP and task leader who will report
major issues to the programme management team (i.e. problems that may affect activities in more than one WP). The
Programme Director ensures that this is communicated to Mistra, especially when changes may impact on the quality
of deliverables. The task will also produce the Data Management Plan which will based on standard templates, e.g.
H2020 Online Manual and other available guidance resources. This plan will describe the lifecycle and sustainability of
all data collected, generated and processed within the programme. This task will also address the legal aspects related
to citizen-based data such as privacy, data rights and ownership.
T5.3 Communication and dissemination (Lead: UGOT; participants: All partners)
This task will develop a detailed Communication and Dissemination strategy (M3), which will function as an evolving
and living document, throughout the programme lifetime. The draft C2B2 communication and dissemination strategy,
including a list of potential dissemination and communication activities, is presented in section 7. At the very beginning
of the programme, the visual identity (logo, a set of graphic elements and images, templates for presentations and
publications, programme video) based on the material of the proposal documents, and the programme public website
containing a portfolio of materials and contents, will be established. The programme website will be constantly updated
with the programme’s latest activities, especially in the LivingLabs, and outcomes. This task will also coordinate the
communication and dissemination of the C2B2 activities and results via social media (including at least 4 short videos)
and the development of digital and printed dissemination materials (including 4 policy briefs); via high quality, open
access papers in reputable peer-reviewed journals; the presentation of C2B2 results at relevant conferences and the
organisation of workshops and conference sessions. The task will also monitor the progress and impact of the C2B2
communication and dissemination activities, resulting in adaptations to the strategy and activities if needed. Finally, this
32

task will select, via a collaborative process among the C2B2 partners, distinct programme results that should be exploited
and devise strategic exploitation plans, using (non)profit business models and plans, as appropriate.
T5.4 C2B2 showcase event M32-M38 (Lead: UGOT; participants: All partners)
A C2B2 showcase event spanning several days will be held in the final stage of the programme (Sustainability) to
showcase the C2B2 approach, the activities, outcomes and impacts of the LivingLabs and to promote the wider
implementation of participatory ocean governance via co-creation and LivingLabs. Aside from showcasing the major
outcomes of C2B2, the event will also serve to help to embed and sustain the C2B2 co-creation approach to ocean
governance by further networking key stakeholders in ocean governance in Sweden as well as internationally.
T5.5 International cooperation and liaison with relevant initiatives (Lead: UGOT; participants: SEI, WMU, SIME,
RISE)
This task will coordinate the cooperation and liaison with relevant initiatives such as the UN Decade on Ocean Science,
International Council for Exploration of the Seas (ICES), Oslo and Paris Convention (OSPAR Commission), Helsinki
Committee (HELCOM) Marine Spatial Planning Working Group and existing networks (e.g. Innovation Platform for
Sustainable Sea & Ocean Solutions (ISSS), ASTRIIS Digital Twin, Ocean Knowledge Action Network, ongoing and
newly funded EU projects (e.g. ILIAD – Digital Twin of the Ocean). Starting with an initial inventory of participation
of C2B2 partners in these initiatives (cross-checking also with T3.4), the task will ensure that C2B2 will interact and
cooperate with these initiatives where relevant and maintains an international outlook in its activities. The task will also
organise dedicated meetings with relevant projects and initiatives relating to C2B2 activities and results and feed the
results into relevant C2B2 tasks and meetings.
WP5 Deliverables
▪ 20 conference papers (All partners)
▪ 4 policy briefs (SIME, RISE, SEI, SND)
▪ 10 short videos (UGOT)
▪ 40 blogs/news articles (All partners)
▪ 10 posters (All partners)
A summary of the C2B2 deliverables produced across the Work Packages is provided in Table 7. This shows the
substantial production and even spread of outputs across different types: 50 scientific outputs; 3 PhD graduates trained;
almost 70 popular scientific outputs; and ~10 technological outputs.
Table 7 Overview of C2B2 deliverables
Scientific outputs
22 scientific articles
20 conference papers
5 synthesis articles
1 toolbox
1 inventory of
projects

Training of
PhDs
1 WP1
1 WP2
1 WP3

Popular scientific
outputs
1 programme website
4 debate articles
4 policy briefs
10 videos
40 blogs/news articles
(website, newsletter)
10 posters

Technological outputs
2+2* Demonstrators of offshore open-by-design
platforms, for multifunctionality and for
autonomous data collection (WP2)
1+1* Demonstrator of decision support system for
the offshore domain, using multiple data sources
(WP2)
2+2* Protocols for marine environmental
monitoring, using eDNA and video (WP1)

* estimated # of solutions to be procured in WP2 using cascading funding, based on the co-created requirements in the LivingLabs

7. Communication
C2B2 will rely on carefully devised supportive communication and dissemination methods and processes to achieve
effective implementation of the programme and to ensure that the project results will be replicable, scalable and have
high impact. To this end, early on in the programme, C2B2 will produce a detailed Communication and Dissemination
strategy, led by the Communication Lead. Tables 8 and 9 present the preliminary C2B2 communication activities and
Tables 10 and 11 the preliminary dissemination activities to science, society and policy. The implementation of the
Communication and Dissemination strategy will be monitored, regularly reviewed by the Programme Management
Team and updated as needed.

33

Table 8 Communication channels and key messages per target group
Target Group
Policy makers and
regulators at
National and EU
level
Municipalities and
networks

Relevant bodies
OSPAR, SwAM, SEPA,
STA National Grid, DG
ENV, DG ENER, DG
CLIMA, DG RTD, EEA
WMO,
County Administrative
Boards, municipalities

Key Message
“C2B2 demonstrates how key
stakeholders can be engaged in
jointly addressing challenges for
transitioning to a sustainable
blue economy.”

The Swedish Society for
Nature Conservation
(SSNC), Keep Sweden Tidy

“The C2B2 approach provides
the means to engage citizens
from all backgrounds in the cocreation of solutions and actions
to pressing ocean and
environmental challenges.”

Scientists working on ecosystems, climate
change, marine biology, marine chemistry,
physical oceanography, socio-ecological
systems.
Business/Industry: Sensor manufacturers, data
aggregators, solution providers

“C2B2 provides innovative
solutions and new interoperable
data via multi-functional data
collection platforms.”

Associations,
citizen NGOs,
vulnerable &
disadvantaged
groups

International
environmental
networks, projects
and initiatives

Ocean KAN, ASTRIIS,
Innovation Platform for
Sustainable Sea & Ocean
Solutions (ISSS), ILIAD,
relevant newly funded EU
projects
OGC, ISO
Cloud and research
infrastructures such as
EOSC, EGI, GAIA-X, DG
INFRA
Wallenberg Foundation,
Adlerbert Foundation, Bill
& Melinda Gates
Foundation

“C2B2 is demonstrating in
Sweden how the co-creation of
data and knowledge can be
embedded in marine spatial
planning and institutionalised as
participatory ocean
governance”
“C2B2 data and tools should be
available in this infrastructure,
along with other data, for the
benefit of research and policy.”
“The C2B2 approach to cocreating participatory ocean
governance provides the means
to engage key stakeholder in
jointly addressing challenges for
a sustainable blue economy.”

Means to reach them
Policy briefs, workshops,
website, social media, direct
contact
Website, videos, fairs,
exhibitions, newsletters, PRs,
direct contacts, conferences,
technical publications, debate
articles, papers, policy briefs,
press releases, workshops,
hackathons

Strategic liaison, publications,
clustering, conferences,
hackathons
Fairs, exhibitions, hackathons,
direct contact, PRs, social
media, newsletters
Publications, conferences,
direct contact, exhibitions

OGC members meetings and
ISO member states
EOSC Association blogs and
EOSC task forces on EOSC
requirements for participation.
Websites, conferences, direct
contact, exhibitions

Table 9 Communication means and KPIs
Communication Kit
ALL Stakeholders
Regularly from M6
A programme visual identity, programme brochures, leaflets, infographics, videos and posters will be created describing
the programme activities and the innovations developed in the LivingLabs. Different versions tailored to the target
group and stakeholders, timeframe of the activities, etc. and the language of the piloting country/region are foreseen.
Most of the material will be available as e-documents and printing will occur as required.
Target Values: Availability of 1 Communication Kit (M6); Videos > 10
Knowledge
ALL Stakeholders
M3 to at least 10 years after the
Platform/website
programme end
The programme website will integrate all programme results, tools and materials generated through the programme. The
first version will be online by M3 and will be updated regularly. A dedicated blog will be updated monthly, where one
C2B2 partner per month contributes with an article. UGOT will sustain the programme website at least XX years after
the programme. The programme will also be communicated through the websites from the partners.
Target Values: Online by: M3; Unique Visitors by M12: >1,50; Unique Visitors by M36: >4,00.
Social Media
ALL Stakeholders
M3 to M48
C2B2 social media accounts will be created and updated with weekly posts. The social media channels of the
partners/staff/cities will be leveraged, further extending the C2B2 outreach (UGOT LinkedIn 135k, Facebook 28.4k,
34

Twitter 12.8k; Chalmers LI 119k, FB 46.8k, Tw 3.9k; Chalmers Industriteknik LI 2.1k , Tw 1.9k; RISE LI 85k, FB
5.9k, Tw 7.3k; WMU-GOI LI 28.4k, FB 114.1k, Tw 5.8k; Umeå U LI 83.2k, FB 47.8k, Tw 12.6k; SMHI LI 6.4k, FB
40k, Tw 10k; SEI LI 53k, FB 11.5k, Tw 38.5k; SU LI 229.4k, FB 129.4k, Tw 16k; IVL LI 19.5k, FB 0.8k, Tw
2.6k; SND LI 0.215k, Tw 0.5k; SIME FB 0.7k, Tw 2.6k; IHE Delft LI 45.1k, FB 36.6k, Tw 19.7k followers). Short
promotional videos will be created for specific programme results. Story-telling from C2B2 partners and LivingLab
participants.
Target Values: Size of online community (by M36): >5,00; No. of impressions (monthly average): >250.
>5k likes via partners’/ >15k likes via cities’ social media
e-newsletters
COs, Activists, Environmentalists, Decision- and
Every semester starting at M6
Policy-makers, Municipalities, NGOs, Businesses/
industry
E-newsletters provide a snapshot of main activities and achievements of C2B2, broadcasting messages to target contact
points via email as highly effective measure of engagement. Use of professional marketing platforms (i.e. Mailchimp).
UGOT and other partners’ e-newsletters.
Target Values: e-newsletters released > 6; Total mailing list contact points > 1,500.
Press releases
Media, Academia, General Public, Municipalities,
Regularly
Businesses/ Industry etc.
Online press releases will be prepared in English and shared with national and European media, also via the programme
website. Press releases will be prepared whenever important news about the programme or results of the programme are
delivered, before key outreach events.
Target Values: press releases > 5; Total targeted receivers > 500.
Policy briefs
Decision- and Policy-makers, Funders
From M12
4 Policy briefs will be prepared and disseminated strategically to their respective target audiences:
State of the art in ocean governance in Sweden (SIME); Recommendations on open innovation for planning agencies,
innovators, and financers (RISE); Transition scenarios for a sustainable blue economy in Sweden and recommendations
for promoting multifunctionality (SEI); Marine data stewardship in Sweden - lessons learned from C2B2 and
recommendations (SND)
Target Values: policy briefs = 4; Total targeted recipients > 100.

Open access publications: An essential part of the C2B2 programme’s Open Science approach is to publish all research
articles as Gold Open Access (OA) in accordance with cOAlition S, Plan S that is, CC BY-licences. Furthermore, RISE
has a standing licence with Springer Science to publish Gold OA with reduced Article Processing Fees (APC) which
can be utilized to reduce programme cost associated with OA. Publication fees, as costs, are included in the programme
budget. The strategic dissemination of C2B2 scientific results per topic is outlined in Table 10.
Table 10 Scientific dissemination
Conferences & Workshops

Journals

Climate and ecosystem
science; land-sea
interactions in the
offshore blue economy

Topic

Ocean Science, Marine Regions Forum 2023,
UN Ocean Conference, EGU, AGU

Data science, monitoring,
sensors, cyber-physical
systems, automation

IFAC Conference on Control Applications in
Marine Systems, ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems,
IEEE/CVF Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Conf., Intl. Conf. On Optical Fibre
Sensors, Eurosensors
Almedalen, World Economic Forum, UN CoP,
UN Conference on sustainable blue economy,
UN Ocean Conference, European Maritime
Day, Business2Sea

Nature Climate Change, Nature Sustainability,
Nature Water, One Earth, Global Change
Biology, Water Research, Environmental
Science and Technology, Water Science of the
Total Environment
EEE Sensors Journal, Journal of Marine Science
and Technology, IEEE Journal of Oceanic
Engineering, Optics Express, Applied Optics
Sensors and Actuators

Sustainable blue economy

Transition towards
participatory governance
and adaptive management

World Water Forum, Water JPI workshops,
LivingKnowledge Conference, OECD Water
Governance Initiative

Nature Sustainability, Journal of Marine
Systems, Sustainability, Marine Policy, Journal
of
Cleaner
Production,
Frontiers
in
Sustainability, Journal of Ocean and Coastal
Economics, Journal of Marine Science and
Technology
Marine Policy, Environmental Science & Policy,
Sustainability Science, Planning Practice &
Research, Water, Environmental Policy &
Planning

35

The C2B2 programme will organise various events and stakeholder interactions to make the C2B2 (interim) results
available, obtain feedback and ensure uptake (see Table 11). Given the salience of the C2B2 result for ocean governance
and adaptive management and related policy and legal frameworks, the programme will provide feedback into policy
processes by means of targeted actions.
Table 11 Organisation of events/stakeholder interactions
Event/stakeholder Target
Purpose of the event
interactions
LivingLab
30
10 per LL; engage relevant key stakeholders in the context and challenge of each case
workshops
and in the identification of required data, knowledge, decisions and actions (WP4)
Training sessions
4
Capacity building on WP1 tools and methods
Hackathons
3
Create sensors, tools, and systems to collect, process and visualise data collected via
multifunctional platforms and fused with other (in-situ and EO) data (WP2)
Open data
2
Encourage the uptake of the new data streams and technologies amongst the SME
challenges
community and provide exploitation opportunities (WP2)
Offshore test days
5
Allow technology developers and entrepreneurs to test the multifunctionality of their
sensors, platforms, robots and other hardware in any Swedish offshore water, and beyond
(WP2)
Marine data
6
Provide subject-specific support to ensure the availability of marine data in line with the
stewardship
FAIR data principles, open data management and integration into existing aggregators
guidance sessions
(WP2)
International
4
Wide dissemination of C2B2 scientific results & recommendations; one with IMO’s
webinar
Ocean Research Group (WP3)
Peer learning
12
Foster collaboration, facilitate meaningful dialogue and reflection in different
constellations of participants, , including cross-case learning (WP4)
Capacity building
6
Support new forms of participatory governance and sustainable blue economy in Sweden
interventions
in terms of data provision, knowledge generation, skills, management practices and
recommendations. Strengthen governance readiness to promote a better blue through
ecosystem-based MSP and IM (WP4)
Meetings with
15
Identify crucial international marine spatial planning out-of-the-box tools (to be tailored
international
to the Swedish context) and integrate best practices (WP5)
initiatives
Conference pres.
30
Wide dissemination of C2B2 scientific results & recommendations (WP5)
Exhibitions
12
Dissemination of C2B2 technological results at comercial exhibitions, incl.. via quick
lunch pitches, mingle events (WP5)
Showcase event
1
Showcase the C2B2 approach, the activities, outcomes and impacts of the LivingLabs
and to promote the wider implementation of participatory ocean governance via cocreation and LivingLabs (WP5)

8. Budget
C2B2 has a total budget of 62.3 MSEK. We apply for 50 MSEK from Mistra. Table B1 shows that the budget per WP
is evenly distributed over the programme period and separated into funding from Mistra and co-funding. Note that
following Mistra’s template “Programme management and communication” is listed first in the budget tables; in the
C2B2 programme this is included as WP5. The strategic reserve for the external programme board is included in WP 5.
The C2B2 budget presents a balanced distribution of Mistra’s support for the three thematic WPs (WP1–3) and slightly
more resources for WP4, which implements the three LivingLabs. The budget stemming from co-funding reflects the
confirmed efforts of the associated partners, with the largest contributions for WP2 and for the LivingLabs in WP4.
Table B1. Total budget, kSEK

Total budget, KSEK
Programme management and communication (WP 5)
WP 1
WP 2
WP 3
WP 4
Summa

Year
Year
Year
Year
Total Whereof
1
2
3
4 budget
Mistra
3 208 3 208 3 208 3 208 12 830
12 350
3 932 2 088 2 088 2 088 10 194
8 350
3 331 3 331 3 331 3 331 13 324
8 700
2 704 2 704 2 704 2 704 10 816
9 400
3 790 3 790 3 790 3 790 15 160
11 200
16 964 15 120 15 120 15 120 62 324
50 000

Whereof Whereof
cocofunding funding
Total
in-kind
in cash budget
480
12 830
1 678
10 028
790
4 000 13 490
1 416
10 816
3 960
15 160
8 324
4 000 62 324

The co-funding secured by C2B2 amounts to 12.3 MSEK and is obtained from participating ‘associated partners’ (all
non-academic), see table B2. The Region of Västra Götaland contributes with 4 MSEK in cash, which is allocated to
the cascading funding of demand-driven innovation and technology development in WP2. The data science company
36

Combine AB and the Geological Survey of Sweden make substantial in-kind contributions to WP1. So far, they have
only committed to year 1, but they plan to make similar contributions during years 2 – 4 of the C2B2 programme,
pending funding decision (currently in the government’s research proposition). The marine tourism company Mooringo
AB has the corresponding approach for its commitment to WP2. Other associated partners have made in-kind
commitments to the entire C2B2 programme period, most of all to the work in the LivingLabs in WP4, but also to the
Stakeholder Reference Board in WP5 and to the thematic work in WP2 and WP3. All associated partners are listed in
Table 6 (section 6), detailing which LivingLab/area(s) they participate in.
Table B2. Funding per partner, kSEK

Funding per partner, KSEK
Mistra
Companies, municipalities, NGOs, and
others
Region of Västra Götaland
Combine AB, Geological Survey of
Sweden,
Mooringo AB
Other associated partners

Universities and research institutes

SUMMA
Mistra
Co-funding
Co-funding's share of total funding %

Year
1
12
500

Year
2
12
500

Year
3
12
500

Year
4
12
500

Whereof
co- Where
funding
of coin-kind - fundin
travel,
g
materials in-kind
,
equipme indirec
nt t costs

Where
of cofundin
g
in-kind
Budg
et payroll
totalt
costs
50
000

4 464 2 620 2 620 2 620
1 000 1 000 1 000 1 000

12
324
4 000

6 166

1 844
1 620 1 620 1 620 1 620

1 844
6 480

1 366 1 518
4 800 7 200

0
0
62
324
50
000
12
324
20%

0

0

0

0

0

16
964
12
500

15
120
12
500

15
120
12
500

15
120
12
500

4 464 2 620 2 620 2 620

Hour
s

FTE
s

6 166

0

Where
of
co- Total
fundin
cog in fundin
cash
g

2 158

4 000 12 324
4 000 4 000

478
1 680

1 844
6 480
0

0

0

0
0

0

2 158

4 000 12 324

Table B3 presents the requested funding from Mistra per partner. Note that the substantial share for UGOT (27 %) is
justified by UGOT’s responsibility for programme management and communication, lead of WP1 as well as substantial
contributions to other programme activities, including the training of a PhD student. UGOT’s share also includes the
10 % strategic reserve for the programme board, as requested by Mistra. IHE Delft has the second largest share (10
%), justified by its role as SL and lead of WP4, leading the implementation of the three LivingLabs. The other partners
leading WPs and LLs have near equal shares (8 %). The respective budgets of Chalmers (7 %) and WMU (6 %) are
justified by their significant contributions to activities and deliverables in WP2 and WP3, respectively, including training
of PhD students. Other partners have corresponding budgets for their specific expert roles in the thematic WP1–3.
Table B3. Funding from Mistra per partner, kSEK.
Funding from Mistra per partner, KSEK
University of Gothenburg
RISE Research Institutes of Sweden
Swedish Institute of the Marine Environment
Chalmers Industriteknik
Stockholm Environment Institute
Umeå Marine Research Centre
Chalmers University of Technology
World Maritime University
Stockholm University
Swedish National Data Service
IVL Swedish Environmental Institute
Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute
IHE Delft (The Netherlands)
SUMMA

Year 1
3 400
950
950
1 000
1 000
1 000
900
750
350
450
250
250
1 250
12 500

Year 2
3 400
950
950
1 000
1 000
1 000
900
750
350
450
250
250
1 250
12 500

Year 3
3 400
950
950
1 000
1 000
1 000
900
750
350
450
250
250
1 250
12 500

Year 4 Total budget
3 400
13 600
950
3 800
950
3 800
1 000
4 000
1 000
4 000
1 000
4 000
900
3 600
750
3 000
350
1 400
450
1 800
250
1 000
250
1 000
1 250
5 000
12 500
50 000

37

Table B4 shows cost types and full-time equivalents per WP. In accordance with the Mistra guidance and instructions,
a strategic reserve of 5 MSEK (out of the 50 MSEK requested from Mistra) has been set aside at the programme host
UGOT in WP5 for allocation by the programme board. Full time equivalents of the budget funded by Mistra corresponds
to aproximately 28 FTE, excluding the strategic reserve and the cascading funding budget (co-funded).The value of the
FTEs has been estimated from 1 700 working hours per year and a conservative average 900 SEK per hour.
Table B4. Funding from Mistra, kSEK, funding per workpackage, kSEK.

Funding from Mistra
Budget per work package, KSEK
Number of full-time equivalents (FTEs)
Direct costs
Payroll costs
Travel costs
Costs of materials
Depreciations
External services
Other direct costs
Total direct costs
Contribution to indirect costs
Strategic programme reserve
Total costs funded by Mistra

Programme
mgmt and
communication [WP 5
]
4,61

WP 1
5,36

WP 2
4,90

WP 3
6,07

WP 4
7,05

5 222
200
50

6 074
100
50

5 556
100
1 000
50
50

6 881
100
10

7 993
400
10

5 522

6 224

6 756

6 991

8 403

1 828
5 000
12 350

2 126

1 944

2 409

2 797

8 350

8 700

9 400

11 200

50

Total
funding
from
Mistra
27,99

31 726
900
1 120
50
100
0
33 896
11 104
5 000
50 000

References
Abhinav, K.A., Collu, M., Benjamins, S., Cai, H., Hughes, A., Jiang, B., Jude, S., Leithead, W., Lin, C., Liu, H. and RecaldeCamacho, L. (2020) Offshore multi-purpose platforms for a Blue Growth: A technological, environmental and socio-economic
review. Science of the Total Environment, 734, 138256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138256.
Acha, V. (2008) Open By Design: The Role Of Design In Open Innovation. In Academy of Management Proceedings (Vol. 2008,
No. 1, pp. 1-6). Briarcliff Manor, NY 10510: Academy of Management. https://doi.org/10.5465/ambpp.2008.33653210.
Alexander, K. A., & Haward, M. (2019) The human side of marine ecosystem-based management (EBM):‘Sectoral interplay’ as a
challenge to implementing EBM. Marine Policy, 101, 33-38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2018.12.019.
Barquet, K. and Green, J. (2022) Towards multifunctionality: adaptation beyond the nature–society dichotomy. Stockholm+50
background paper series. Stockholm Environment Institute, Stockholm.
Bergström, L., C Öhman, M., Berkström, C., Isæus, M., Kautsky, L., Koehler, B., Nyström Sandman, A., Ohlsson, H., Ottvall, R.,
Schack, H. & Wahlberg, M. (2022) Effekter av havsbaserad vindkraft på marint liv: En syntesrapport om kunskapsläget 2021.
Bohman, B. (2019) The ecosystem approach as a basis for managerial compliance: an example from the regulatory development in
the Baltic Sea Region. The Ecosystem Approach in Ocean Planning and Governance: Perspectives from Europe and Beyond.
Leiden: Brill Nijhoff, 80-116. https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004389984_004.
Boyes, S. J., & Elliott, M. (2014) Marine legislation–The ultimate ‘horrendogram’: International law, European directives & national
implementation. Marine pollution bulletin, 86(1-2), 39-47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.06.055.
Broström, G. (2008) On the influence of large wind farms on the upper ocean circulation. Journal of Marine Systems, 74(1-2), 585591. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmarsys.2008.05.001.
Cedergren, E., Huynh, D., Morf, A., & Moodie, J. (2020) Strengthening regional resilience through adaptive collaboration: A case
study on the fisheries co-management Northern Bohuslän. https://doi.org/10.6027/PB2020:5.2001-3876.
Chen, D., M. Rojas, … and A. M. Tréguier. (2021) Framing, Context, and Methods. In: "Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change",
Eds. Masson-Delmotte, V., P. … and B. Zhou, Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157896
Chesbrough, H. W. (2003) Open innovation: The new imperative for creating and profiting from technology. Harvard Business
Press.
Costello, C., Cao, L., Gelcich, S., Cisneros-Mata, M.Á., Free, C.M., Froehlich, H.E., Golden, C.D., Ishimura, G., Maier, J.,
Macadam-Somer, I. & Mangin, T. (2020) The future of food from the sea. Nature, 588(7836), 95-100.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2616-y.
Christensen, K. H., Sperrevik, A. K., & Broström, G. (2018) On the variability in the onset of the Norwegian Coastal Current.
Journal of Physical Oceanography, 48(3), 723-738. https://doi.org/10.1175/JPO-D-17-0117.1.
Dafforn, K. A., Glasby, T. M., Airoldi, L., Rivero, N. K., Mayer-Pinto, M., & Johnston, E. L. (2015) Marine urbanization: an
ecological framework for designing multifunctional artificial structures. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 13(2), 8290. https://doi.org/10.1890/140050.
Emmerson R., Grimvall, A., Conley, D. and Lindegarth, M. (2018) Strategic Analysis of Sweden’s marine environmental
monitoring and assessment. Report No. 2017:6. Swedish Institute for the Marine Environment.
38

Environmental Targets Committee (Miljömålsberedningens). (2021) Havet och människan. SOU 2020: Delbetänkande av
Miljömålsberedningen. (Vol. 1–2).
European Commission (2021) The EU blue economy report 2021. Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries.
Publications Office. https://doi.org/10.2771/8217
European Commission. (2008) Roadmap for Maritime Spatial Planning: Achieving Common Principles in the EU [Communication
from the Commission]. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2008:0791:FIN:EN:PDF
European Commission. (2021) The EU Blue Economy Report 2021. https://doi.org/10.2771/8217.
European Commission (2022) Gendered Innovations 2: How Inclusive Analysis Contributes to Research and Innovation, Directorate
General for Research and Innovation, Brussels, https://doi.org/10.2777/316197.
Gligor, D., Gligor, N., Holcomb, M., & Bozkurt, S. (2019) Distinguishing between the concepts of supply chain agility and
resilience: A multidisciplinary literature review. The International Journal of Logistics Management.
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-10-2017-0259.
Grimvall, A., Svedäng, H., Farnelid, H., Moksnes, P. O., & Albertsson, J. (2019) Ekosystembaserad förvaltning som metod för att
hantera negativa miljötrender och oklara orsakssamband. Havsmiljöinstitutets Rapport, (2019), 6.
Halbe, J., & Pahl-Wostl, C. (2019) A methodological framework to initiate and design transition governance processes.
Sustainability, 11(3), 844. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11030844.
HaV (2020) Redovisning av uppdrag att vidareutveckla den maritima strategins indikatorer och redovisa en uppföljning av den
maritima strategin (p. 124).
Heinze, C., Blenckner, T., Martins, H., Rusiecka, D., Döscher, R., Gehlen, M., Gruber, N., Holland, E., Hov, Ø., Joos, F. &
Matthews, J.B.R. (2021) The quiet crossing of ocean tipping points. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(9),
e2008478118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2008478118.
Hornborg, S., Bergman, K. & Ziegler, F. (2021) Svensk konsumtion av sjömat, RISE rapport 2021:83, Göteborg.
IEA (2021) World Energy Outlook 2021, IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2021
IPCC (2021) Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, In press, doi:10.1017/9781009157896.
Jagers, S. C., Berlin, D., & Jentoft, S. (2012) Why comply? Attitudes towards harvest regulations among Swedish fishers. Marine
Policy, 36(5), 969-976. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2012.02.004.
Jentoft, S., & Chuenpagdee, R. (2009) Fisheries and coastal governance as a wicked problem. Marine policy, 33(4), 553-560.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2008.12.002.
Jouffray, J. B., Blasiak, R., Norström, A. V., Österblom, H., & Nyström, M. (2020) The blue acceleration: the trajectory of human
expansion into the ocean. One Earth, 2(1), 43-54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2019.12.016.
Karlsson, M. (2019) Closing marine governance gaps? Sweden's marine spatial planning, the ecosystem approach to management
and stakeholders' views. Ocean & Coastal Management, 179, 104833. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2019.104833.
Kidd, S., Jones, H., & Jay, S. (2019) Taking account of land-sea interactions in marine spatial planning, In J. Zaucha & K. Gee
(Eds) Maritime Spatial Planning: Past, Present, Future pp. 245–270, Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-319-98696-8#bibliographic-information
Langlet, D. (2018) Scale, space and delimitation in marine legal governance–Perspectives from the Baltic Sea. Marine Policy, 98,
278-285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2018.09.027.
Lighthouse (2021) National Innovation & Research Agenda Shipping. https://lighthouse.nu/verksamhet/nria/
Loorbach, D. (2010) Transition management for sustainable development: a prescriptive, complexity‐based governance framework.
Governance, 23(1), 161-183. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0491.2009.01471.x.
Lundgren, A., Morf, A.,Cedergren, E., Teräs J. (2020) ”Marint Gränsforum Skagerrak – delutvärdering”, Nordregio Working Paper,
Nordregio, Stockholm. http://doi.org/10.6027/WP2020:2.1403-2511.
Maritime Cluster of West Sweden (Maritima klustret i Västsverige Omvärldsanalys) (2022) Maritima klustret i Västsverige
Omvärldsanalys https://mellanarkiv-offentlig.vgregion.se/alfresco/s/archive/stream/public/v1/source/available/sofia/run90601768787422-652/surrogate/Omva%cc%88rldsanalys22web220630.pdf
Mazzucato, M. (2016) From market fixing to market-creating: A new framework for innovation policy. Industry and Innovation,
23(2), 140–156. https://doi.org/10.1080/13662716.2016.1146124
Miljömålsberedningens (2021) Havet och människan. SOU 2020: Delbetänkande av Miljömålsberedningen. (Vol. 1–2).
Morf, A., J. Sandsten, M. Prutzer, & N. Lindroth (2021) Blue Economy and Coastal Development – Sharing Swedish Experiences.
Report no. 2021:5. Swedish Institute for the Marine Environment.
Morf A., Moodie J., Cedergren E., Eliasen S.Q., Gee K., Mahadeo S., Husa S., Vološina M & Kull, M. (2022) Challenges and
Enablers to Integrate Land-Sea-Interactions in Cross-Border Marine and Coastal Planning: Experiences from the Pan Baltic
Scope Collaboration, Planning Practice & Research, 37 (2022 - 3), 333-354.
National Confederation of the Fisheries Industry (Fiskbranschens Riksförbund). (2022) Svensk Fisknäring Nr 1 2022. Accessed on
16 August 2022 at https://issuu.com/billes/docs/svensk_fiskn_ring_nr_1_2022
Nilsson, A. K., & Bohman, B. (2015) Legal prerequisites for ecosystem-based management in the Baltic Sea area: The example of
eutrophication. Ambio, 44(3), 370-380. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-015-0656-6.

39

Nyström Sandman, A., Christiernsson, A., Gidhagen Fyhr, F., Lindegarth, M., Kraufvelin, P., Bergström, P., Nilsson, P.,
Fredriksson, R., Bergström, U., & Hogfors, H. (2020). Grön infrastruktur i havet: Landskapsperspektiv i förvaltningen av
Sveriges marina områden. http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:naturvardsverket:diva-8498
OECD (2022) "Sustainable ocean economy", in Environment at a Glance Indicators, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/1f798474-en.
OECD
(2015)
OECD
Principles
on
Water
Governance.
Accessed
on
19
July
2022
at
https://www.oecd.org/cfe/regionaldevelopment/OECD-Principles-on-Water-Governance-en.pdf.
Píriz, L. (2004) Hauling Home the Co-Management of Coastal Fisheries: A study on institutional barriers to fishermen’s
involvement in the management of coastal fisheries on the West Coast of Sweden. Doctoral thesis. Göteborg University.
Píriz, L. (2005) Praktisk samtal om samförvaltning av fiske. Fiskeriverket (Swedish Board of Fisheries), Göteborg.
Przedrzymirska, J., Zaucha, J., …and Schultz-Zehden, A. (2021) Multi-use of the sea as a sustainable development instrument in
five EU sea basins. Sustainability, 13(15), 8159. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13158159.
Prutzer, M., Morf, A., & Nolbrant, P. (2021). Social Learning: Methods Matter but Facilitation and Supportive Context Are Key—
Insights from Water Governance in Sweden. Water, 13(17), 2335. https://doi.org/10.3390/.
Regeringen. (2021) Data – en underutnyttjad resurs för Sverige: En strategi för ökad tillgång av data för bl.a. Artificiell intelligens
och digital innovation.
Rettig et al. (under review) A Bayesian network to inform the management of target species in Kosterhavet National Park under
contrasting storylines of environmental change
Roth. F., & Gustafsson. C. (2021) Degraded Coasts Emit Greenhouse Gases. Policy Brief. Stockholm: Baltic Eye, Stockholm
University. Accessed on 19 July 2022 https://balticeye.org/en/policy-briefs/coastal-blue-carbon/.
Schubert, P., Ekelund, N. G. A., Beery, T. H., Wamsler, C., Jönsson, K. I., Roth, A., Stålhammar, S., Bramryd, T., Johansson, M.,
& Palo, T. (2018) Implementation of the ecosystem services approach in Swedish municipal planning. Journal of Environmental
Policy & Planning, 20(3), 298–312. https://doi.org/10.1080/1523908X.2017.1396206
Schupp, M.F., Bocci, M., Depellegrin, D., Kafas, A., Kyriazi, Z., Lukic, I., Schultz-Zehden, A., Krause, G., Onyango, V. & Buck,
B.H. (2019) Toward a common understanding of ocean multi-use. Frontiers in Marine Science, p.165.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2019.00165.
Ståhlbröst, A., & Holst, M. (2012) The Living Lab Methodology Handbook. Vinnova.
Stephenson, R.L., Hobday, A.J., Cvitanovic, C., Alexander, K.A., Begg, G.A., Bustamante, R.H., Dunstan, P.K., Frusher, S., Fudge,
M., Fulton, E.A. & Haward, M. (2019) A practical framework for implementing and evaluating integrated management of marine
activities. Ocean & Coastal Management, 177, 127-138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2019.04.008.
Shahabi-Ghahfarokhi, S., Rahmati-Abkenar, M., Jaeger, L., Josefsson, S., Djerf, H., Yu, C., Åström, M. & Ketzer, M. (2022) The
response of metal mobilization and redistribution to reoxygenation in Baltic Sea anoxic sediments. Science of the Total
Environment, 837, .155809. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.155809.
Stuchtey, M., Vincent, A., Merkl, A., Bucher, M., Haugan, P. M., Lubchenco, J., & Pangestu, M. E. (2020) Ocean solutions that
benefit people, nature and the economy. High Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy.
Svensk Vindenergi. (2021). “Havsbaserad Vindkraft – En Nyckel till Industrins Omställning. Accessed on 19 July 2022 at
https://svenskvindenergi.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/Policyrapport-Havsbaserad-vindkraft-en-nyckel-till-industrinsomstallning.pdf.
SwAM. (2018) Strategic Environmental Assessment of the Marine Spatial Plan proposal for Skagerrak and Kattegat.
Turner, D. R., Edman, M., Gallego-Urrea, J. A., Claremar, B., Hassellöv, I. M., Omstedt, A., & Rutgersson, A. (2018). The potential
future contribution of shipping to acidification of the Baltic Sea. Ambio, 47(3), 368-378. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-0170950-6.
UNESCO (2021) Recommendation on Open Science, adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO at its 41st session, in
November 2021. https://en.unesco.org/science-sustainable-future/open-science/recommendation
Wehn. U., Collins, K., Anema, K., Basco-Carrera, L. and Lerebours, A., (2018) Stakeholder engagement in water governance as
social learning: Lessons from practice, Water International, 43(1), 34-59.
Wehn, U. and Pfeiffer, E. (2020) Guidelines for Citizen Observatories and future recommendations, Deliverable 1.13, Ground Truth
2.0, https://gt20.eu/knowledge-base/deliverable-d1-13-guidelines-for-citizen-observatories-and-future-recommendations
Wehn, U., Pfeiffer, E., Gharesifard, M., Alfonso, L. and Anema, K. (2019) Updated validation and socio-economic impacts report,
Deliverable 1.12, Ground Truth 2.0., https://gt20.eu/knowledge-base/deliverable-d1-12-updated-validation-and-socioeconomic-impacts-report
Wehn, U., Vallejo, B., Seijger, C., Tlhagale, M., Amorsi, N., Sossou, S.K., Genthe, B. & Onema, J.M.K. (2021) Strengthening the
knowledge base to face the impacts of climate change on water resources in Africa: A social innovation perspective.
Environmental Science & Policy, 116, 292-300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2020.09.026.
World Bank. (2017) Global Mobility Report 2017: Tracking Sector Performance. Washington, DC.
Ytreberg, E., Hansson, K., Hermansson, A., Parsmo, R., Lagerström, M., Jalkanen, J-P., & Hassellöv, I-M. (2021) Metal and PAH
Loads from Ships and Boats, Relative Other Sources, in the Baltic Sea. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.34937.19046.
Xylia M., Passos M., Pisedu T., Barquet K. (forthcoming) Reviewing multi-use platforms: an exploration of literature themes about
marine, multifunctional, modular, and mobile applications (M4s).

40

Appendix I – Impact logic

Appendix II – CVs

Programme Director:
Dr. Torsten Linders
University of Gothenburg

Linders is a main contributor to UGOT’s role as Sweden’s academic node for cross sector collaboration
within the marine domain and the blue economy. Notably this includes coordinating SCOOT – Swedish
Centre for Ocean Observing Technology, and Ocean Data Factory Sweden.
Linders has a background in oceanographic research, especially ocean in-situ observations and numerical modelling of physical processes. (Before that he served 10 years in the Swedish army, including
peace-keeping duties in Kosovo.) Since 2017 he is focusing on initiating and coordinating cross sector
projects within the broad field the blue economy, with a special focus data and innovation.
Selected publications:
-

Asteman I.P., N. Van Nieuwenhove, T. J. Andersen, T. Linders, K. Nordberg. 2021. Recent environmental change in the Kosterhavet National Park marine protected area as reflected by hydrography and sediment proxy data. Marine Environmental Research 166:105265
Swart S., M. du Plessis, A. F. Thompson, L. C. Biddle, I. Giddy, T. Linders, M. Mohrmann, S-A
Nicholson. 2020. Submesoscale Fronts in the Antarctic Marginal Ice Zone and Their Response to
Wind Forcing. Geophysical Research Letters. 47, e2019GL08664
Linders T., E. Infantes, A. Joyce, T. Karlsson, H. Ploug, M. Hassellöv, M. Sköld, E.-M. Zetsche.
2018. Particle sources and transport in stratified Nordic coastal seas in the Anthropocene, Elementa Science of the Antropocene, 6, p. 29.
Linders T., P. Nilsson, Wikström A., and M. Sköld. 2018. Distribution and fate of trawling induced suspension of sediments in a marine protected area. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 75(2),
785–795

Project coordinator and PI:
-

Ocean Data Factory Sweden. Funded by Vinnova, Sweden’s innovation agency. (PL)
SCOOT – Swedish Centre for Ocean Observing Technology, funded by the European Commission. (Coordinator)
Seacat I & II, experimental surface platform for maritime monitoring. Both projects funded by
Vinnova, Sweden’s innovation agency. (PL)
PLAN-SUBSIM – a national implementation of a platform for analysis of subsea images. Funded
by Formas, Sweden’s research council for sustainable development. (PL)

Steering groups, etc.:
-

Member of the steering group for the Revere Lab (Resource for vehicle research at Chalmers University of Technology), responsible for expanding the Lab’s high-end competence in automation
and AI to the maritime domain.
Chair of the board for the foundation Bornö Institute for Ocean and Climate Studies, which manages
the oldest oceanographic field station in Scandinavia, often regarded as the cradle of Swedish marine
research.

Education & training:
-

PhD in oceanography, University of Oslo, 2009
MSc in oceanography, University of Gothenburg, 2005

Scientific Lead:
Prof. Uta Wehn

IHE Delft Institute for Water Education
(University of Gothenburg)
Wehn is Associate Professor of Water Innovation Studies, IHE Delft Institute for Water Education, The
Netherlands, and Adlerbert visiting Professor of Marine Citizen Science, University of Gothenburg. She
is a social scientist from the field of innovation studies with background in ICTs, working at the intersection of data & knowledge co-creation, digital innovation, and water and environment. She has >20
years of combined experience in industry, research and international development, >25 projects; >50
peer-reviewed papers; h-index (25); >3960 citations in Google Scholar.
Wehn is an experienced leader of large interdisciplinary research and capacity development projects on
co-creation of social innovations in complex multi-stakeholder settings, tailoring user-centred, participatory approaches incl. LivingLabs in diverse cultural, geographic and socio-economic settings. She
specializes in Action Research on social learning in water governance for (local) change and impact as
well as contributions to theory and practice. She is an expert in Open Science and the ‘Science of Citizen
Science’, focusing on how to harness Open Science and (marine) Citizen Science for participatory governance and sustainable behavior.
Selected publications:
-

-

Wehn, U., Gharesifard, M., Ceccaroni, L., Joyce, H., Ajates, R., Wood, S., Bilbao, A., Parkinson,
S., Gold, M., Wheatland, J., (2021) Impact Assessment of citizen science: state of the art and guiding principles for a consolidated approach, Sustainability Science, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625021-00959-2.
Fritz, S., See, L., Carlson, T., Haklay, M., Oliver, J., Fraisl, D., Mondardini, R., Brocklehurst, M.,
Shanley, L., Schade, S., Wehn, U. , … and West, S., (2019) Citizen Science and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, Nature Sustainability, October 2019, 922-930.
Joshi, S. and Wehn, U. (2017) From Assumptions to Artifacts: Unfolding e-participation within
Multi-level Governance, Electronic Journal of e-Government, Vol. 15(2), 116-129.
Wehn, U. and Evers, J. (2015) The social innovation potential of ICT-enabled citizen observatories
to increase e-Participation in local flood risk management, Technology in Society, August,187-198.

Project coordinator and PI:
-

Ground Truth 2.0 (H2020; 2016-2019) – co-design methodology for social innovations; validation
and impact assessment in 6 countries
AfriAlliance (H2020, 2016-2021) – social innovation platform for water and cli-mate, incl. 10 demand-driven innovation Action Groups throughout Africa
CSEOL (ESA, 2019-2021) – innovation incubation of citizen science and EO

Steering groups, etc.:
-

IHE Delft representative at the OECD Water Governance Initiative (2013-2022)
Co-Chair of the global Citizen Science & Open Science Community of Practice, appointed representative for UNESCO
Steering Committee of Ocean KAN (Knowledge Action Network), Future Earth
Science Reference Group of CSIRO Valuing Sustainability Future Science Platform (Australia)

Education & training:
-

PhD (2001) and MSc (1996) in Science and Technology Policy (Innovation Studies), SPRU, University of Sussex, UK
BSc (Honours) (1994) in Computer Science, Portsmouth University, integrated w. IBM UK Ltd.

Communication Leader:
Maria Holmkvist
University of Gothenburg

(RISE Research Institutes of Sweden)
Holmkvist has 20 years of experience as communicator, including 14 years for Lindholmen Science
Park and 6 years for the Maritime Cluster of West Sweden and UGOT Centre for Sea and Society She
has extensive experience of strategic work in academic environments and in cross-sector collaborative
environments (spanning large and small industry, local and national public agencies, as well as research
organisations). She is the communication lead and strategist for both UGOT’s marine profile and activities, and Maritime Cluster of West Sweden. She is currently Project Manager & Communications Manager Livsmedelsacceleratorn at RISE.
Selected publications:
-

Communication plans for UGOT Centre for Sea and Society
Communication plans for Kristineberg Center for Marine Research and Innovation
Communication plans for SWEMARC, Swedish Mariculture Research Center

Project coordinator, etc.:
-

Communication lead at the upstart of Kristineberg Center for Marine Research and Innovation.
Communication lead at the upstart of SWEMARC, Swedish Mariculture Research Center.
Internal and external communication of the UGOT science faculty move to new premises.
Project lead for marine arenas at the yearly political conference in Almedalen, Gotland.
Project lead for UGOT marine podcasts.

Steering groups, etc.:
-

Maritime Cluster of West Sweden (management team)
UGOT Centre for Sea and Society (management team)

Education & training:
-

BSc, Media and communication science, University of Gothenburg, 2001

Lead WP1 Open Ecosystem
and Climate Science:
Prof. Mats Lindegarth
University of Gothenburg

Lindegarth’s research and teaching involve marine spatial planning (MSP), coastal zone management,
aquaculture, benthic ecology and statistical modelling. Current research activities are typically policydriven and focus on methodological issues related to sampling, modelling and mapping of benthic
biodiversity, monitoring and integrated status assessment of coastal waters. Additionally, he has led and
contributed to numerous (>30) commissions from national and regional agencies on subjects such as
monitoring, status assessment for the WFD and MSFD, ecosystem services and MSP.
Selected publications:
-

Bucas et al. 2013. Empirical modelling of benthic species distribution, abundance, and diversity in
the Baltic Sea: evaluating the scope for predictive mapping using different modelling ap-proaches.
ICES J. Mar. Sci. doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fst036
Bergström et al. 2013. Evaluating eutrophication management scenarios in the Baltic Sea using
species distribution modelling. J. Appl. Ecol. 50(3): 680-690
Lindegarth et al. (Editors). 2016. Ecological Assessment of Swedish Water Bodies; develop-ment,
harmonisation and integration of biological indicators. Final report of the research programme
WATERS.
Carstensen J and Lindegarth M, 2016. Confidence in ecological indicators: A framework for quantifying uncertainty components from monitoring data. Ecol. Ind. 67: 306-317
Kotta et al. 2020. Cleaning up seas using blue growth initiatives: Mussel farming for eutrophi-cation control in the Baltic Sea. Science of The Total Environment 709.
Nygård et al. 2020 Developing benthic monitoring programmes to support precise and repre-sentative status assessments: a case study from the Baltic Sea. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 192 (12), 1-18

Project coordinator and PI:
-

BONUS-SEAM - towards streamlined Baltic Sea environmental assessment and monitoring. BONUS ERA-NET project. (2018-2020) Coordinator.
BONUS-OPTIMUS. BONUS ERA-NET project. Funded by the European Commission (20172020) PI
IMAGINE - Implications of Alternative Management Strategies on Marine Green Infrastructure.
Funded by Swedish Environmental Protection Agency (2016-2019) PI.
WATERS - Waterbody Assessment Tools for Ecological Reference conditions and status in Sweden Funded by Swedish Environmental Protection Agency and Swedish Agency for Marine and
Water Management. (2011-2016) Coordinator.
BONUS PREHAB - Spatial prediction of benthic habitats in the Baltic Sea. BONUS ERA-NET
project. (2009-2001) Coordinator.

Steering groups, etc.:
-

The Swedish Institute for the Marine Environment (Steering group, analyst)
SWEMARC – The Swedish Mariculture Research Center (Steering Group)

Education & training:
-

PhD Marine Zoology, University of Gothenburg, 1996
MSc Biology, University of Gothenburg, 1991

Lead WP2 Open, datadriven innovation &
emerging technologies:

Prof. Mikael Lind
RISE Research Institutes of Sweden
Lind is Senior Strategic Research Advisor at RISE Maritime Operations and adjunct Professor of Maritime Informatics at Chalmers University of Technology. He is specializing in digital innovation of
sustainable transports. He is an experiences project manager and orchestrator of open innovation, covering digital collaboration and traffic management within and between multiple traffic means. He has
substantial experiences from empowering the aviation sector, the maritime sector, public transportation
and ride sharing, and electrification of cars.
Selected publications:
-

Lind, M., Ward, R., Bergmann, M., Haraldson, S., Zerem, A., Hoffmann, J., & Eklund, E. (2021).
Maritime informatics for increased collaboration. In Maritime Informatics (pp. 113-136). Springer,
Cham.
Lind, M., Hägg, M., Siwe, U., & Haraldson, S. (2016). Sea traffic management–beneficial for all
maritime stakeholders. Transportation Research Procedia, 14, 183-192.
Henfridsson, O., & Lind, M. (2014). Information systems strategizing, organizational sub-communities, and the emergence of a sustainability strategy. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 23(1), 11-28.

Project coordinator and PI:
-

YardCDM Demo, developing digital collaboration for transport of goods on rail, (2022 – 2024),
funded by the Swedish Transport Administration, PI
FEDERATED: Digital ecosystem innovation in action – a federative approach to sustainable and
seamless multi-modal transport chains (2020-2023), funded by EU, PI
The sustainable port as a digital node (2021), funded by the Swedish Transport Administration, PL
STEAM: Sea Traffic Management in the Eastern Mediterranean (2020-2022), funded by EU, PI
STM (Sea Traffic Management) Validation Project (2013-2019), funded by EU, PI
MONALISA 2.0 (2013 – 2015), developing the Motorways of the Sea, funded by the Swedish
Maritime Administration, PI
Future Airports (2010 – 2014), funded by LVF (Swedish Aviation Agency), PL
Innovation for Sustainable Everyday Travel (ISET), funded by the Swedish Transport Administration, 2009-2013, PL

Steering groups, etc.:
-

Project community member and expert assigned by the World Economic Forum (WEF).
Expert assigned by UN/CEFACT for projects on track and trace and on ship agents and brokers.
Domain expert for maritime research with Institute of High-Performance Computing (IHPC)
(A*Star), Singapore.
Co-leader of the Supply Chain Innovation Network with Wolfgang Lehmacher, Anchor Group.

Education & training:
-

PhD Information Systems Development, Linköping University, 2001

Lead WP3
Ocean governance and
adaptive management:
Dr. Andrea Morf
Swedish Institute for the
Marine Environment

Morf is a social scientist working at the science-policy interface in marine/coastal planning and management (participation, conflict management, knowledge integration, evaluation, blue economy); She
has >25 years of research and co-developed transdisciplinary research and capacity development, focusing on integrative coastal and marine governance, including with authorities and stakeholders in collaborative work across marine basins. She has extensive experience of evaluating, advising and reviewing public bodies at Swedish, Nordic, European and global level.
Selected publications:
-

-

Morf A., Moodie J., Cedergren E., Eliasen S.Q., Gee K., Mahadeo S., Husa S., Vološina M. &
Kull M. (2022). Challenges and Enablers to Integrate Land-Sea-Interactions in Cross-Border Marine and Coastal Planning: Experiences from the Pan Baltic Scope Collaboration, Planning Practice & Research, 37 (2022 - 3), 333-354.
Frederiksen P., Morf A., von Thenen M., Armoskaite A., Luhtala H., Schiele K. S., Strāķe, S.,
Hansen H.S. (2021). Proposing an ecosystem services-based framework to assess sustainability
impacts of maritime spatial plans (MSP-SA). Ocean and Coastal Management, 208, 105577.
Moodie, J.R., Kull, M., Cedergren, E. Giacometti, A., Morf, A., Eliasen, S.Q., Schrøder, L. (2021)
Transboundary marine spatial planning in the Baltic Sea Region: towards a territorial governance
approach? Maritime Studies 20, 27–41.
Prutzer, M., Morf, A., Nolbrant, P. (2021). Social Learning: Methods Matter but Facilitation and
Supportive Context Are Key- Insights from Water Governance in Sweden. Water 13 (17): 2335.
Morf, A., Kull, M., Piwowarczyk, J. and Gee, K (2019). Towards a Ladder of Marine/Maritime
Spatial Planning Participation, pp 219-243 in: Zaucha J., Gee K. (eds) Maritime Spatial Planning –
past, present, future, Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.

Project coordinator and PI:
-

eMSP BNSR: Ecosystem based MSP in the Baltic and North Sea Regions (2021-24); EU DG
MARE. WP lead, PI, science advisory board chair.
Advocacy Coalitions – The role of advocacy coalitions, policy brokers and policy learning in the
formation of Marine Protected Areas (2016-22); FORMAS: PI.
Evaluation of Swedish MSP process and design of evaluation framework (2019-21) SwAM; PL
BONUS BaltSpace. Towards Sustainable Governance of Baltic Marine Space (2015-18); PI
Pan Baltic SCOPE (2018-19) Baltic Sea MSP capacity development; EU DG MARE: WP lead.

Steering groups, etc.:
-

WG Marine Planning Coastal Zone Management (co-chair), ICES.
IOC-UNESCO MSP Global 2030 Initiative (associated expert).

Education & training:
-

PhD Human Ecology (2006), University of Gothenburg
Spatial planning office (1995-97), Canton Thurgovia, Frauenfeld, Switzerland.
MSc Environmental Science (1994), Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich.

Climate Expert:

Prof. Deliang Chen
University of Gothenburg
Chen is professor in Physical Meteorology, August Röhss Chair Professor in Physical Geography directed towards Geoinformatics, and Head of Regional Climate Group.
Chen’s research includes Earth System Science and global environmental change with a focus on climate change and its impact on ecosystems. He is an elected member of six
Academies including the World Academy of Sciences and the Royal Swedish Academy of
Sciences. He has served on numerous international and national committees and boards, as well as advised various governmental, intergovernmental, and international non-governmental bodies including
funding agencies. He is also a Coordinating Lead Author for IPCC. Recently, he was listed in the @Reuters Hot List of top climate scientists in the world.
Selected publications:
Chen has a total citation of 20 519, an H-index of 58 in the last 5 years (since 2017). Totally he has
published 500+ articles in peer-reviewed journals (290+ since 2017) such as Science, Science Advances, Nature Energy, Nature Climate Change, Nature Communications, Nature Scientific Data, Nature Geoscience, Nature Reviews Earth & Environment, National Science Review, PNAS, and AMBIO.
- Tang, R., et al including D. Chen, 2022: Increasing terrestrial ecosystem carbon release in response to autumn cooling and warming. Nature Climate Change. 12, 380-385.
- Chen, D., 2021: Impact of climate change on sensitive marine and extreme terrestrial ecosystems:
recent progresses and future challenges. Ambio, 50(6), 1141-1144.
- Chen, D., et al., 2020: Hydroclimate changes over Sweden in the 20th and 21st centuries: a millennium perspective. Geografiska Annaler: Series A, 103(2), 103-131.
Project coordinator and PI:
-

Co-Chair of “Third Pole Environment (TPE)”
Coordinator of the WCRP/CORDEX flagship project “Convection-Permitting Third Pole”
National Strategic Research Areas MERGE (ModElling the Regional and Global Earth system)
BECC (Biodiversity and Ecosystem services in a Changing Climate)
SNIC project “S-CMIP: Swedish climate research and contributions to the sixth International Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP6)”
VR project “Linking accelerated warming over the Tibetan Plateau to the increased frequency of
European summer heat waves”

Steering groups, etc.:
-

Member of the International Science Advisory Council of Stockholm Resilience Centre,
Chair of the Nomination Committee of the Stockholm Water Prize,
Member of External Science Advisory Group of the Bolin Climate Centre
Member of the Future Earth Governing Council.

Education & training:
-

PhD in 1992 by the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz in Germany, under the guidance of Nobel Laureate Prof. Paul Crutzen.

Resilience and risk
management expert:

Dr. Karina Barquet
Stockholm Environment Institute
Barquet is Senior Research Fellow at Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI), Team Lead for the Water,
Coasts and Ocean group HQ, and Lead for SEI’s Global Strategic Engagement for the Ocean. Barquet
has a background in human geography with a specialty in multilevel coastal governance. Her work is
cross-disciplinary around questions of policy, innovation and adaptation connected to water, coastal and
marine landscapes. She has worked with research and innovation projects focused on infrastructure resilience and multifunctional planning, including ongoing work on Marine Multifunctional solutions. She
is leading several government-commissioned reports including on the Blue Economy and on transboundary governance of the Antarctic.
Selected publications:
-

Barquet K. Järnberg L., Weitz N., Lobos Alva I., 2021. Exploring mechanisms for systemic thinking indecision-making through three country applications of SDG Synergies. Sustainability Science 17, 1557–1572.
Johannesdottir, S.L., Kärrman, E., Barquet, K., et al. 2021. Sustainability assessment of technologies for resource recovery in two Baltic Sea Region case-studies using multi-criteria analysis.
Cleaner Environmental Systems 2, June, 100030
WSP. 2021. A nutrient trading system for the Baltic Sea region. SwAM commissioned report.
Rosemarin, A., Macura, B., Carolus, J., Barquet, K., et al. 2020. Circular nutrient solutions for agriculture and wastewater – a review of technologies and practices. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 45, 78–91.
Barquet K. Järnberg L., Rosemarin A., Macura B. 2020 Identifying Barriers and Opportunities for
a Circular Phosphorus Economy in the Baltic Sea Region. Water Research 171, 115433

Project coordinator and PI:
-

InnovaCuba 2022-2025, Sida regional funds – PI
HydroHazards 2020-2024, MSB - coordinator and PI
Gridless Solutions 2020-2024, Sida core - co-coordinator and PI
Mistra Geopolitics 2020-2024 – PI for project Geopolitics of the Blue Economy
Co-Clime, 2018-2022, JPI – PI
BONUS Return 2017-2021, Bonus Blue Baltic - coordinator and PI

Steering groups, etc.:
-

Board Member, Water Centre, KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Leadership group, International Water Association (IWA) Sweden
Advisor for B.Green Project for Green Infrastructure, Forum Virium
Advisor for Baltic Stewardship Initiative, WWF (2020 -2021)
International expert group SDG indicator 17.14.1: “Number of countries with mechanisms in place
to enhance policy coherence of sustainable development”

Education & training:
-

PhD (2015) Human Geography, Norwegian University of Science and Technology.
MSc (2008) International Development & Management, Lund University.
Ba (2006) Peace & Conflict Studies, Malmö University.

National politics and
environmental law expert:
Dr. Åsa Romson
IVL Swedish Environmental
Research Institute

Romson is a senior researcher at IVL, with focus on climate law and policy instruments for the transition
towards a sustainable society, working in transdisciplinary projects on climate transitions of cities and
analyzing the science - policy interface of transformative change. She is developing the institute’s work
on policy innovation, using her extensive experience on analyzing legal barriers and possible legal proposals. She has more than ten years of experience from policy making as a politician, including as deputy
prime minister and minister for climate and the environment. After leaving politics she has been the
government’s special investigator to analyze the Swedish system for environmental monitoring and
evaluation.
Selected publications:
-

Romson, Å., Hellsten, S, och Rydstedt, A., (2021) ’Tillståndsvillkor för klimatutsläpp rörande
transporter till och från hamnar och flygplatser – rättsligt olämpligt eller rimlig styrning mot klimatmålen?’ Nordisk miljörättslig tidskrift, nr 1 2021
Romson, Å. and Forsbacka, K. (2020) ‘The Swedish Climate Policy Framework including the Climate Act’ in Muinzer, T. (eds) National Climate Change Acts - The Emergence, Form and Nature
of National Framework Climate Legislation, Hart Publishing.
Romson, Å., Holm, F., Ivansson, M. (2020) ’Att styra mot minskad bilparkering - om plan- och
bygglagen, p-tal och mobilitetsåtgärder’, IVL Svenska Miljöinstitutet rapport C554
Fridell, E., Hansson, J., Jivén, K., Styhre, L., Romson, Å., och Parsmo, R (2022) Studie på sjöfartsområdet - Styrmedel och scenarier för sjöfartens omställning (uppdrag Energimyndigheten),
IVL Svenska Miljöinstitutet rapport C665
Martin, M., Herlaar, S., Lönnqvist, T., Anderson, S., Romson, Å., Hjort, A., and Peck, P. (2021)
Implications of electrification for regional biogas municipal transportation systems - Exploring
Narratives and Systemic Effects, Final report to ‘f3’16:2021
Mata, É. och Romson, Å. (2019) Hur mycket behöver man mäta för att värdera rätt? i Innovation
och stadsutveckling – en forskningsantologi om organiseringsutmaningar för stad och kommun;
red. Algehed, Eneqvist, Jensen och Lööf; Mistra Urban Future

Project coordinator and PI:
-

Project lead for several assignments of Swedish EPA, especially in circular economy and policy
reforms towards plastic pollution and recycling

Steering groups, etc.:
-

Swedish Institute for Future Studies (chair of the board).
Stockholm Environmental Law and Policy Centre (board member).

Education & training:
-

LLD (2012), Environmental Law, Stockholm University
LLM (2001) in Environmental Law, Stockholm University
Bachelor in Humanities (1995) in Nordic languages, Stockholm University

Marine environmental law
expert:
Dr. Anna Christiernsson
Stockholm University

Christiernsson is Associate Professor and a Baltic Sea Fellow, with a focus on marine biodiversity law
and seascape governance. Her research revolves around the role of law in governing complex and dynamic ecosystems and the interplay between law and ecology. She works on adaptive and ecosystembased ocean management and fisheries. She has profound knowledge on specific regulatory instruments
such as marine spatial planning, marine protected areas, species protection, multi-annual plans and fisheries quotas. Her research includes international, EU and national law. She has extensive experiences in
outreach and participation in different legislative processes.
Selected publications:
-

Christiernsson (2021). Är naturreservat ett effektivt instrument för att bevara och återställa ekologiskt funktionella landskap? Nordic Environmental Law Journal 2021:2, 7-29.
Bruce, Bradshaw, Ohlsson, Sobek and Christiernsson (2021). Inconsistencies in how environmental risk is evaluated in Sweden for dumping dredged sediment at sea. Frontiers in Marine Science,
8.
Nyström Sandman, Christiernsson, Gidhagen Fyhr, Lindegarth, Kraufvelin, Bergström, Nilsson,
Fredriksson, Bergström and Hogfors (2020). Grön infrastruktur i havet – landskapsperspektiv i förvaltningen av Sveriges marina områden. Report 6930, Swedish EPA.
Christiernsson and Michanek (2016). Miljöbalken och fisket. Nordic Environmental Law Journal,
2016:1, 11-28.
Christiernsson et al. (2015). Marine Natura 2000 and Fishery - The Case of Sweden. Journal for
European Environmental and Planning Law 12(1), 22-49.
Christiernsson (2015). God miljöstatus och fiske – Hur effektiva är miljökvalitetsnormer? Nordic
Environmental Law Journal, 2015:2, 93-106.

Project coordinator and PI:
-

Legal perspectives on landscape planning for a sustainable climate change transition (2021-2026),
Interdisciplinary project funded by Formas.
Law, sustainable energy use and the preservation of cultural heritage values (2019-2023). Interdisciplinary project funded by the Swedish Energy Agency.
Transferable fisheries quotas, Interdisciplinary project at Swedish Institute for the Marine Environment (2013-2015).
Cost-benefit-assessments in ocean governance, Interdisciplinary project at Swedish Institute for
the Marine Environment (2013-2015).

Steering groups, etc.:
-

Member of the Swedish Academy of Ocean Governance (Havsförvaltningsakademin).
Expert at JP miljönet, a digital journal for practicing lawyers and other working with environmental
issues in the public or private sector.

Education & training:
-

LLD (2011), Luleå University of Technology.
LLM (2006), Luleå University of Technology.
Master Degree in Economics (2002), Luleå University of Technology.

Appendix III – Certificate from planned programme host

